On July 6, 1989, Mikhail Gorbachev spoke to the Council of Europe in Strasbourg of “Europe as a Common Home.” One line in that speech grabbed headlines around the world: “Any interference in internal affairs, any attempts to limit the sovereignty of states ‒ whether of friends and allies or anybody else ‒ are inadmissible.”1 That sentence was interpreted, and apparently was meant, as a revocation of the Brezhnev Doctrine, which had been enunciated in 1968 to justify the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia, and held that the Soviet Union had the right to intervene in socialist countries when “forces that are hostile to social-ism try to turn the development of some socialist country towards capitalism.”2 Gorbachev’s apparent “permission” to push for reform and for greater independence encouraged movements already underway in the region. By October, peaceful protests were occurring regularly in cities in East Germany, where a KGB officer named Vladimir Putin witnessed them in Dresden.3 In November, the Berlin Wall, the most tangible symbol of the Cold War division of Europe, was opened, symbolically ending the Cold War.

Gorbachev’s speech provides a useful beginning point for understanding the sources of the Russia-Ukraine conflict. Not only did it hasten the 1 James A. Markham, “Gorbachev Spurns the Use of Force in Eastern Europe,” New York Times, July 7, 1989. The full text of Gorbachev’s speech is at https://chnm.gmu.edu/1989/

archive/files/gorbachev-speech-7-6-89_e3ccb87237.pdf.

2 The relevant excerpt from Brezhnev’s speech is translated at the “Modern History Sourcebook: The Brezhnev Doctrine, 1968,” https://sourcebooks.fordham.edu/mod/

1968brezhnev.asp. The original was in Pravda, September 25, 1968.

3 Putin described the episode in his biographical interview, Vladimir Putin with Nataliya Gevorkyan, Natalya Timakova, and Andrei Kolesnikov, First Person: An Astonishingly Frank Self-Portrait by Russia’s President Vladimir Putin, trans. Catherine A. Fitzpatrick (New York: PublicAffairs, 2000). Many have argued that the episode was formative for Putin, and helps explain the intensity of his opposition to protests such as those in Kyiv in 2004 and 2014. See for example Fiona Hill and Clifford Gaddy, “How the 1980s Explains Vladimir Putin,” The Atlantic, February 14, 2013.

27

28

New World Order? 1989–1993

demise of the Soviet Bloc, it raised the question of the independence of the Soviet Republics, several of which had longstanding independence movements. Ever since that time, the question of Russia’s role and rights in its region have been a source of contention, as Russia’s claims have conflicted with those of Ukraine, the Baltic states, and the West. The principle that force would not be used was tested almost from the very beginning, when Soviet Special Purpose Police Unit (OMON) forces attacked the Latvian Interior Ministry in January 1991.

Gorbachev’s “common European home” proposed an alternative to the “Europe whole and free” suggested by US President George H. W.

Bush a few months earlier in Mainz, Germany. While Gorbachev imagined a Europe in which socialist and capitalist states got along peacefully and productively, Bush envisioned a Europe where liberal democracy and the market would unite the continent. “The path of freedom leads to a larger home, a home where West meets East, a democratic home, the commonwealth of free nations.”4 While Gorbachev’s notion of Europe was inherently pluralist, Bush’s vision stressed adherence to a single set of values. Thus, even as the Cold War was ending, a profound disagreement emerged about the principles that should underpin politics in Europe.5

By December 1993, nationalist and communist parties were

ascendant in Russia’s parliament. Already the parliament had passed a resolution stating that the port of Sevastopol, traditionally home to Russia’s Black Sea Fleet, but since 1991 Ukrainian territory, should be considered Russian territory. In Ukraine, leaders had gained legal independence from Russia, but could not figure out how to break the country’s dependence on Russian energy. Nor was the Soviet Union the only country to collapse in 1991. In December, the disintegration of Yugoslavia began, igniting a conflict which would bedevil the continent and would later be cited by Vladimir Putin as a justification for annexing Crimea.

4 “A Europe Whole and Free Remarks to the Citizens in Mainz,” President George Bush, Rheingoldhalle, Mainz, Federal Republic of Germany, May 31, 1989. Though the Cold War was not yet over, Bush was certain who had won: “[I]n the West, we have succeeded because we’ve been faithful to our values and our vision. And on the other side of the rusting Iron Curtain, their vision failed.”

5 Richard Sakwa, writing in 2016, finds this tension between “greater Europe” and “wider Europe” continuing to define the region’s politics. See “How the Eurasian Elite Envisages the Role of the EEU in Global Perspective,” East European Politics and Society 17 (2016): 11‒13. For a detailed study of the challenge of developing a post-Cold War institutional framework that included Russia, see William H. Hill, No Place for Russia: European Security Institutions since 1989 (New York: Columbia University Press, 2018).

The Road to Ukrainian Independence

29

These episodes illustrate the argument that guides this chapter. Many, if not all, of the basic ingredients of the crisis that emerged in late 2013 and early 2014 were already present by 1993. These problems resisted solution because they were rooted in three highly challenging environments that overlapped each other. First, Ukraine and Russia disagreed fundamentally about what their relationship would be. Second, while the international scene that emerged after the collapse of the Soviet Union seemed benevolent, it raised intractable questions about Russia’s role in the new Europe. Third, the domestic situations in Ukraine and Russia were chaotic, with economic dislocation and institutional confrontation impeding a smooth transition to democracy.

The Road to Ukrainian Independence

Nationalists across the Soviet Union took advantage of Gorbachev’s political liberalization to press for independence. In March 1990, elections were held for the republic-level parliaments, and for the first time candidates who were not members of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) were allowed to run. In Ukraine, the newly formed Rukh Party, which grew out of the dissident-led People’s Movement for Ukraine, won a quarter of the seats in the Verkhovna Rada. Leonid Kravchuk, a communist leader who sought to co-opt the nationalists, was elected speaker. On June 12, the Russian Congress of People’s Deputies issued a “Declaration of State Sovereignty of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic.” The act declared the supremacy of Russian legislation over that of the Soviet government, kicking off what became known as the “war of laws,” and spurring similar declarations in other republics.

On July 16, Ukraine’s Verkhovna Rada followed the trend, passing (by a vote of 335‒4) the “Declaration of State Sovereignty of Ukraine,”

which declared Ukraine’s sovereignty but not its independence from the Soviet Union, a contradiction that was confusing but also pragmatic.

There was a strong impetus to establishing as much self-control as possible, but Ukraine was not ready to secede or to force a showdown with central authorities. Ukrainian nationalists made a tactical decision to ally with “national communists,” such as Kravchuk, rather than to oppose the Communist Party entirely, which would have left the nationalists in a minority. Therefore, Ukraine moved toward independence not by ejecting the communist establishment but by allowing the establishment to co-opt the cause of independence.

The sovereignty declaration stated Ukraine’s “intention” to become a

“permanently neutral” state and to adhere to three nonnuclear

30

New World Order? 1989–1993

principles: not to accept, produce, or acquire nuclear weapons.6 These two provisions were to generate much controversy in the coming years.

What was entailed by neutrality, or “non-bloc status” as it came to called, and whether the policy continued to be wise, were questions that dogged Ukraine’s foreign policy until 2014, when neutrality was decisively abandoned.

Gorbachev scrambled to keep the Soviet Union from disintegrating. In March 1991 he held a referendum across the Soviet Union, asking voters: “Do you consider necessary the preservation of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics as a renewed federation of equal sovereign republics in which the rights and freedom of an individual of any nationality will be fully guaranteed?” The contradiction between sovereign equality and preservation of the Soviet Union was ignored, foreshadow-ing Russia’s later insistence that an independent Ukraine join a Russia-led union of some sort. Ukrainian lawmakers added a second question:

“Do you agree that Ukraine should be part of a Union of Soviet sovereign states on the basis on the Declaration of State Sovereignty of Ukraine?”

Both questions won significant assent in Ukraine (71 percent and 82

percent, respectively).

Gorbachev proposed a new treaty, which would devolve considerable autonomy to the republics, but maintain a united military, a common foreign policy, and a single currency. The Verkhovna Rada, now divided between nationalists, “national communists,” and pro-union communists, debated the treaty throughout the summer of 1991, proposing amendments but deferring decisive action. The nationalists, supported by many of the national communists, were set on pursuing full independence, but were unready to move decisively, fearing a crackdown. This put Ukraine between the position of eight republics, including Russia, that were planning to sign the treaty and six that had already rejected the process.7 In July, the Verkhovna Rada created the position of a popularly elected president, analogous to the position Yeltsin held in Russia, and scheduled the election for December.

While Ukrainian leaders felt that the proposed Union Treaty would provide too little autonomy, conservatives in Moscow feared that it provided too much. Opposition to Gorbachev’s economic reforms was also mounting. In late July, a group of prominent political and cultural figures published a “Word to the People” calling on the reforms to be halted. Addressed to “Russians, Citizens of the USSR, Compatriots,”

6 Deklaratsiya Suverenitet Ukrayiny, July 16, 1990, Verkhovna Rada website, https://

zakon.rada.gov.ua/laws/show/55-12.

7 Bohdan Nahaylo, The Ukrainian Resurgence (London: Hurst, 1999), pp. 364‒365.

The Road to Ukrainian Independence

31

the letter equated Russian nationalism with the preservation of the Soviet Union, and saw the moves toward independence and economic reforms as a sellout of the country to outside enemies.8

As George H. W. Bush flew to Moscow at the end of July 1991, Gorbachev was trying to hold together the Soviet Union, to reform its economy, and to gain the support of the West. Gorbachev warned Bush that Ukraine’s independence might lead to a conflict similar to that unfolding in Yugoslavia ‒ but with thousands of nuclear weapons involved. Bush and National Security Advisor Brent Scowcroft, trying to consolidate the gains made in arms control, in the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact, and in the UN Security Council on Iraq, hoped to bolster Gorbachev’s position.

This was the context when Bush stopped in Kyiv on his way back to Washington. In a speech to the Rada, Bush sought to persuade Ukrainians to move forward within, rather than apart from, the Soviet Union:

“Freedom is not the same as independence. Americans will not support those who seek independence in order to replace a far-off tyranny with a local despotism. They will not aid those who promote a suicidal nationalism based on ethnic hatred.” Bush went on to endorse Gorbachev’s proposed union treaty: “The nine-plus-one agreement holds forth the hope that Republics will combine greater autonomy with greater voluntary interaction ‒ political, social, cultural, economic ‒ rather than pursuing the hopeless course of isolation.”9 The speech would likely have been forgotten were it not for New York Times columnist William Safire, who dubbed it the “Chicken Kiev Speech,” representing the opinion of many in the United States who supported Ukraine’s independence either as an intrinsic good or as a way to further weaken the Soviet Union.

A few weeks later, the coup against Gorbachev overwhelmed all of these leaders’ plans. When it became clear that the coup had failed, on August 24, the Rada declared Ukraine independent (by a vote of 346 to 1

with three abstentions10), extended the authority of speaker Kravchuk to act as head of state, and scheduled a referendum on independence, to be held along with the presidential election already scheduled for December 1. The question now was not whether the Soviet Union would be maintained, but whether something new could be forged from its fragments. On August 25 Yeltsin announced his support for signing the 8 Sovietskaya Rossiya, July 23, 1991.

9 George H. W. Bush, “Remarks to the Supreme Soviet of the Republic of the Ukraine in Kiev, Soviet Union August 1, 1991,” www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/remarks-

the-supreme-soviet-the-republic-the-ukraine-kiev-soviet-union.

10 Nahaylo, The Ukrainian Resurgence, p. 391.

32

New World Order? 1989–1993

Union Treaty and stressed that the union should be a federation, not a looser confederation. Two days later he threatened to resign if the treaty were not signed, putting himself at odds with the Ukrainian leadership.11

Creating a State

The fall of 1991 was a time of extraordinary improvisation. In Ukraine, the agenda included setting up the institutions of a sovereign government, securing international recognition, holding the referendum and presidential election, negotiating terms of separation with the Soviet and Russian governments (and the other successor states), forming a Ukrainian military, and stemming economic collapse. The scope of the task is hard to imagine. Many of Ukraine’s biggest industrial enterprises, for example, had almost no relationship with Kyiv, having been run by ministries in Moscow. Similarly, Ukraine did not inherit an army but rather a variety of disconnected military units with no Defense Ministry or General Staff to command or control them.12

The leadership charged with turning these various pieces of the larger Soviet entity into a state was completely unprepared. Despite the monu-mental scope of the task, the surprise with which independence arose, and the inexperience of those making the changes, the state did not collapse. And while the economy declined severely in the early post-Soviet years, Ukrainian leaders did succeed in building a separate state, weak as it was.

While Ukraine had to create a state almost from scratch, Russia had two competing states: a Soviet one which ran the whole country, and a Russian one which was “hardly more than an empty shell.”13 In the fall of 1991, this problem was resolved through the incremental takeover of Soviet institutions, including the military, by Yeltsin’s Russian government. Yeltsin’s efforts to take control of Soviet institutions had the unintended consequence of reaffirming to the other republics that any

“central” organization would in fact be controlled by Russia. This redoubled their resistance to creating new central institutions. Some of 11 Raymond L. Garthoff, The Great Transition: American-Soviet Relations and the End of the Cold War (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1994), p. 479.

12 James Sherr, “Security, Democracy, and ‘Civil Democratic Control’ of Armed Forces in Ukraine,” in Jennifer D. P. Moroney, Taras Kuzio, and Mikhail Molchanov, Ukrainian Foreign and Security Policy: Theoretical and Comparative Perspectives (Westport, CT: Praeger, 2002), p. 94.

13 Mikhail E. Bezrukov, “The Creation of a Russian Foreign Policy,” in James E. Goodby and Benoit Morel, eds., The Limited Partnership: Building a Russian-US Security Community (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993), pp. 82‒83.

Creating a State

33

the rhetoric from the Russian government inflamed opinion in Ukraine, as when Yeltsin’s press secretary said that unless there were an agreement on a new union “the RSFSR [Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic] reserves the right to raise the question of reviewing its borders.”14

While the Soviet military leadership subjected itself to Russian control, the Ukrainian leadership declared its control of all forces and ownership of all material on Ukrainian territory.15

There were some signs that Ukraine would join a new “Union of Sovereign States.”16 In late November, however, as the signing of a new draft treaty was being prepared, Yeltsin objected to the deal, seeking more power for Russia vis-à-vis the “center.” Further discussion was deferred until after Ukraine’s referendum.

The United States, anticipating the outcome of the referendum, announced that it would quickly recognize Ukraine’s independence, a move

that

some

in

the

Bush

administration

felt

undermined

Gorbachev’s efforts to keep the Union together and reduced US leverage over the nascent Ukrainian government.17 Yeltsin expressed frustration at the US announcement, fearing that it would provoke Russian nationalists.18

On December 1, Ukraine held its referendum on independence and its presidential election. All six presidential candidates supported independence. Kravchuk, the acting president, former speaker of the Verkhovna Rada, and former ideology chief the Communist Party of Ukraine, won easily, with 61.6 percent of the vote to 23.3 percent for Rukh leader Vyacheslav Chornovil, with the remainder split among the other candidates or “against all.”19

14 “Zayavlenie press-sekretarya Presidenta RSFSR,” Rossiiskaya Gazeta, August 27, 1991, p. 2.

15 Garthoff ( The Great Transition, p. 481) points out that the military threats made by General Varennikov, one of the coup plotters, to Kravchuk during the coup attempt, helped convince Kravchuk that he urgently needed to subordinate the military forces in Ukraine to Ukrainian control.

16 Garthoff, The Great Transition, pp. 481‒482.

17 The Bush administration was divided over recognition. The debate was resolved largely by domestic factors: the defeat of Republican Dick Thornburgh in a special election for the US Senate in Pennsylvania, a state with a large East European population, was blamed in part on the administration’s slow recognition of Baltic independence, and with a reelection battle looming in 1992, Bush sought to cover this flank. See Michael R.

Beschloss and Strobe Talbott, At the Highest Levels: The Inside Story of the End of the Cold War (New York: Little Brown & Company, 1994), pp. 448‒449; and Garthoff, The Great Transition, p. 494.

18 Gartoff, The Great Transition, p. 495.

19 On the 1991 presidential elections and referendum, see Sarah Birch, Elections and Democratization in Ukraine (New York: St. Martin’s, 2000), chapter 5.

34

New World Order? 1989–1993

The referendum asked simply: “Do you support the Declaration of Independence of Ukraine?” the text of which was appended. The result was overwhelming: 92.3 percent voted in favor of independence. In every single region of Ukraine, including Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, a majority supported independence. However, in Crimea and Sevastopol, the majorities were much smaller than elsewhere: 54.2 and 57.1 percent, respectively. In both Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts, 83.9 percent voted for independence.

Belavezha: The Civilized Divorce

Immediately following the vote in Ukraine, Yeltsin, Kravchuk, and Belarusian president Stanislav Shushkevich met at a dacha in the Belavezha park in Belarus to hammer out a deal on the relationship among the successor states. With large majorities supporting independence and his presidency, Kravchuk came to Belarus empowered, while Yeltsin was still trying to finish off Gorbachev in Moscow. As Mikhail Bezrukov asserted, until the end of 1991 the foreign policy of the Russian Federation was driven primarily by Yeltsin’s “rivalry with the ‘Gorbachev team.’”20 Both Gorbachev and Yeltsin (along with Belarus and the five Central Asian states) supported signing the revised Union Treaty. But Ukraine was now opposed.21

Yeltsin had two goals that were in tension. The first was to get rid of the Soviet Union, and with it Gorbachev. The second was to retain a “center,” dominated by Russia, that would control nuclear weapons and provide economic coordination. He stated upon arriving in Minsk that “we must without fail work out a viewpoint that will prevent our three Slav states from splitting apart, no matter what happens.”22

There were many motivations for seeking to preserve a single market, military, and currency. Pragmatically, dissolving the Soviet economy would create chaos, given the combination of deep integration and lingering central planning. Dissolving the Soviet military would also create enormous problems. St. Petersburg Mayor Anatoly Sobchak 20 Bezrukov, “The Creation of a Russian Foreign Policy,” p. 88.

21 The Belavezha meeting and the process leading up to it are discussed in detail in Serhii Plokhy, The Last Empire: The Final Days of the Soviet Union (New York: Basic Books, 2014), chapter 15.

22 “Yeltsin’s Arrival Statement in Minsk,” Radio Moscow, December 7, 1991, in Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS), Soviet Union, December 9, 1991, p. 50, as quoted in Garthoff, The Great Transition, p. 483.

Belavezha: The Civilized Divorce

35

called the formation of a Ukrainian military “a time bomb under the future of all mankind.”23

In direct opposition, Kravchuk felt that he could not really be in control of Ukraine if it was part of some kind of supranational state controlled from Moscow. Kravchuk had the upper hand tactically, and he drove a hard bargain. Without his approval, the Soviet Union could not be disbanded and Gorbachev sidelined. His price was to dissolve the Soviet Union without a new union to replace it.

The three leaders agreed to dissolve the 1922 Union Treaty (the legal basis for the formation of the Soviet Union from Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus), thus, in international legal terms, dissolving the Soviet Union.24 This served Yeltsin’s need to make Gorbachev irrelevant and Kravchuk’s need to dissolve central structures. Having dissolved the Soviet Union, Yeltsin was eager to forge a new set of common structures to manage common problems. Kravchuk was resolutely opposed.

They papered over this profound disagreement by creating the “Commonwealth of Independent States” (CIS). The Commonwealth looked like a confederation, and had many of the structures that the Russian leadership wanted, but at Ukraine’s insistence, none of the commitments were legally binding.25 In Ukraine, the CIS was seen not as a new organization, but as a way of managing complete separation. Dmytro Pavlychko, the head of the Rada’s Foreign Affairs Committee, called it “a bridge for us over the chaos.”26

The details of what happened at Belavezha show that from the very beginning there was a conflict of interest between Russia’s desire to retain some central control over the region and Ukraine’s opposition.

Even Boris Yeltsin, who was far more democratically and western oriented than other Russian leaders, sought central control over the republics, especially Ukraine. And even Kravchuk, who was elected Ukraine’s president running against a nationalist, and had his highest support in eastern Ukraine and Crimea, adamantly refused to compromise Ukraine’s sovereignty.

23 Nahaylo, The Ukrainian Resurgence, p. 441.

24 The legality of these measures was not uncontested. In addition to the 1922 Union Treaty, there was another artifact of the Soviet era that gave Ukraine and Belarus a claim to sovereignty that the others lacked: both were original members of the United Nations.

This originated in the horse-trading that accompanied the founding of the UN.

25 As Garthoff ( The Great Transition, p. 485) points out, there was another option: a new Union Treaty could have been signed by Russia, Belarus, and the Central Asian states.

But including Ukraine was an essential goal for Yeltsin, and so he chose the “least common denominator” that would also include Ukraine.

26 Quoted in Fred Hiatt, “Russia, Ukraine See Commonwealth Differently,” Washington Post, December 13, 1991, p. A1.

36

New World Order? 1989–1993

The Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)

The CIS was formally founded at a meeting in Almaty on December 21

with eleven members ‒ the three Slavic states; the five Central Asian states; and Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Moldova. The leaders in Almaty sent a joint statement to Gorbachev informing him that the Soviet Union and his presidency were at an end.27 Gorbachev finally admitted defeat and resigned his post on December 25, and on the following day the Soviet Union officially ceased to exist.

While Russia sought to maintain a single CIS military, Ukraine was determined to build its own military out of the Soviet forces on its territory. Despite being nearly broke, Ukraine managed to find the funding to take over paying for the forces on its territory. This issue overlapped with arguments over the Black Sea Fleet and over Russian or CIS peacekeeping forces being deployed in the region. At a meeting of CIS defense ministers in April 1992, eleven drafts were discussed considering common defense structures; Ukraine (along with Azerbaijan) refused to sign any of them. Similarly, in May, when six states gathered in Tashkent to sign a Collective Security Treaty similar to NATO’s Article V, Kravchuk did not even attend, and Ukraine (along with Moldova, Belarus, and Azerbaijan) refused to sign.28

Sergei Rogov of Russia’s Institute for the USA and Canada captured the dilemma that Russia faced in trying to maintain a unified military. On the one hand, he worried that if Russia was not more assertive, the armed forces would disintegrate. On the other, if Russia was more assertive, it might irk its partners. “Each sovereign state has a right to build its own military forces, and an independent Ukraine cannot be blamed for doing so. However, in trying to achieve immediate military independence, Ukraine failed to take the security interests of Russia into account.”29

He was, in essence, recognizing the Russian-Ukrainian security dilemma.

Problems of Economic Coordination and the Collapse

of the Ruble Zone

The Soviet Union was more tightly integrated than the European Union, and was dissolved with no prior planning. Already in the spring of 1991, 27 Garthoff, The Great Transition, p. 486.

28 The six signatories were Russia, Armenia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.

29 Sergei Rogov, “A National Security Policy for Russia,” in James E. Goodby and Benoit Morel, eds., The Limited Partnership: Building a Russian-US Security Community (Oxford: SIPRI/Oxford University Press, 1993), pp. 77‒78.

Problems of Economic Coordination

37

the liberalization of grain prices had spurred an outflow of food from Ukraine to Russia, where prices were higher. Ukraine first introduced an export ban and then in July announced a plan for rationing grain via a coupon system. The plan limited the quantity of cigarettes (four packs), eggs (ten), meat (half a kilogram), and vodka (one bottle) that an individual could carry out of the republic.30 This angered other republics (and fueled corruption) but did not solve any of the underlying problems involving agricultural production and markets.31

All the successor states were still using the Soviet ruble in early 1992.

They dealt with growing debt problems among enterprises by issuing credit and creating new money. This naturally led to massive inflation.

The IMF recommended forming a single central bank to manage monetary policy for the ruble, and Russia supported this, but there were three barriers. First, Ukraine was not willing to compromise its independence.

Second, monetary policy would either be dominated by Russia, which was unacceptable to Ukraine, or it would not, which was unacceptable to Russia. Third, the states did not agree on monetary policy. Russia, pursuing structural adjustment (“shock therapy”), prioritized controlling inflation by limiting currency emissions, while Ukraine and others sought to avoid hard choices by printing more money.

Ukraine’s continuing issuance of credit had the effect of exporting inflation to Russia. In January 1992, Ukraine established a parallel currency, the karbovanets, which quickly lost value. In October 1992, to insulate Russia from the inflation caused by Ukrainian monetary policy, the Russian Central Bank stopped making payments based on Ukrainian ruble loans. Ukraine responded by leaving the ruble zone and establishing a “non-cash” karbovanets. The ruble zone held together a bit longer, but Russia effectively forced the others out in mid-1993 by replacing existing Soviet ruble notes in Russia with new Russian ones.32

Ukraine and Russia now controlled their own monetary policies, but wildly fluctuating exchange rates created a drag on trade. Ukraine’s highly expansionary monetary policy led to rapid inflation from 1992 to 1994. If one needed evidence against the gradual economic reform that 30 Sergei Tsikora, “Protiv “Utechki’ Urozhaya,” Izvestia, July 17, 1991, p. 1; Sergei Tsikora, “Ukraina: vnov’ torgovlya po kuponam,” Izvestia, July 27, 1991, p. 2.

31 The dissolution of the Soviet economy in 1991 is described vividly in Yegor Gaidar, Collapse of an Empire: Lessons for Modern Russia, trans. Antonina W. Bouis (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 2007), chapter 8.

32 Ukraine’s economic problems and policies are detailed in Anders Åslund, How Ukraine Became a Market Economy and Democracy (Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2009), and Oleh Havyrlyshyn, The Political Economy of Independent Ukraine: Slow Starts, False Starts, and a Last Chance? (London: Palgrave MacMillan, 2017).

38

New World Order? 1989–1993

some advocated for Russia, Ukraine was producing plenty of it, as inflation spiraled up, GDP shrank, and poverty increased. In 1993, the Economist wrote: “Rarely can misguided policies and mismanagement have led so quickly to a country’s collapse.”33

This early episode illustrated an enduring pattern. Ukraine and Russia recognized the need for economic coordination, but completely disagreed on how to achieve it. Ukraine resisted the creation of central institutions, or insisted at a minimum that such institutions not be controlled by Russia. Russia sought central institutions, and because its economy was by far the largest, insisted that it control them.

The Black Sea Fleet, Sevastopol, and Crimea

Crimea has a complex history, different elements of which support different contentions about who should control it today.34 The peninsula has been essential to control of the Black Sea, with commercial and military significance dating back to the ancient Greeks. Long controlled by the Crimean Khanate, it was seized by the Russian empire in 1783, and its lands were distributed to Russian nobles, beginning a process in which the Russian population of the peninsula grew. Germany occupied the territory during World War II, and Sevastopol was labeled a “Hero City” by the Soviets. After the war, Stalin deported much of the Crimean Tatar population for its alleged collaboration with Germany during the occupation. This led to people officially identified as Russians becoming a majority. In 1954, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev transferred the territory from Russia to Ukraine, ostensibly to mark the 300th anniversary of Russian-Ukrainian “reunification,” but more likely to win support from Ukrainian leaders in the ongoing post-Stalin succession battle in Moscow.35

As complicated as it is, Crimea’s history is typical of the region.

Territories passed among multiple states and populations changed dramatically through war, famine, and repression. As Elizabeth Wood stresses, the “imagined geography” of Crimea is as important as the actual geography.36 For a variety of reasons, the post-Soviet Russian elite 33 “Warnings from Massandra,” The Economist, September 11, 1993, p. 52.

34 See Paul R. Magosci, This Blessed Land: Crimea and the Crimean Tatars (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2014).

35 The 1954 decision is examined in depth by Mark Kramer, “Why Did Russia Give Away Crimea Sixty Years Ago,” Cold War International History Project e-Dossier No. 47, March 19, 2014.

36 Elizabeth A. Wood, “Introduction,” in Elizabeth A. Wood, William E. Pomeranz, E.

Wayne Merry, and Maxim Trudolyubov, Roots of Russia’s War in Ukraine (Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson Center Press, 2016), pp. 3‒6.

The Black Sea Fleet, Sevastopol, and Crimea 39

put immense stress on the need to recover Crimea. As Fyodor Lukyanov wrote in 2016, “Russians had always viewed Crimea as the most humiliating loss of all the territories left outside of Russia after the disintegration of the Soviet Union.”37

In Crimea, Ukraine faced two connected problems. One was Russia’s claims on Crimea, Sevastopol, and the Black Sea Fleet. The second was an internal Crimean move (encouraged by some in Russia) toward separatism.38 While Russia in principle accepted Ukraine’s claim to military assets on its territory,39 it had two reservations: nuclear weapons (discussed below) and the Black Sea Fleet. The agreement forming the CIS in December 1991 had stated that the fleet would be part of the CIS

military, but since there was to be no CIS military, that solution would not work.

Even many Russian liberals who accepted Ukraine’s independence believed that Crimea, Sevastopol, and the Black Sea Fleet were Russian.

Sevastopol was viewed as having “all-Union status” as a military city, and as therefore belonging to the Soviet Union’s successor state, Russia.

Similarly, the Black Sea Fleet was viewed as inherently Russian, and legally as part of the central Soviet assets that should revert to Russia.

From this perspective, the deal struck at Belavezha, in which Ukraine gained independence with no resolution of these questions, represented both a blunder by Yeltsin and a deception by Kravchuk. Thus, in January 1992, Mayor Anatoly Sobchak of St. Petersburg, generally seen as pro-western and moderate, stated that “the Black Sea fleet was created centuries ago, and even a Communist Party hack [Kravchuk] can’t change all that in a day.” Yeltsin agreed: “The Black Sea fleet was, is and will be Russia’s. No one, not even Kravchuk will take it away from Russia.”40 The question of the fleet itself was less important than that of the ownership of the base in Sevastopol and, by extension, Ukraine’s 37 Fyodor Lukyanov, “Putin’s Foreign Policy: The Quest to Restore Russia’s Rightful Place,” Foreign Affairs 95, 3 (May/June 2016): 35.

