On January 12, 1994, US President Bill Clinton stopped in Kyiv on his way to Moscow, where he and Leonid Kravchuk would join Russian President Boris Yeltsin to sign the Trilateral Agreement on nuclear weapons. Clinton stated that “Our meeting this evening begins a new era in our relations” and announced that Ukraine had been invited to join NATO’s Partnership for Peace (PfP).1 Earlier that day, before leaving Prague, Clinton had discussed the “Partnership for Peace” at a press conference with the leaders of the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and Slovakia:

While the Partnership is not NATO membership, neither is it a permanent holding room. It changes the entire NATO dialogue so that now the question is no longer whether NATO will take on new members but when and how. It leaves the door open to the best possible outcome for our region, democracy, markets, and security all across a broader Europe, while providing time and preparation to deal with a lesser outcome.2

Just as one of the vexing issues of the early post-Soviet era, Ukraine’s nuclear weapons, was put to rest, another was launched. Clinton’s “no longer whether … but when” remark committed the United States to NATO expansion. Nor was Clinton wrong when he said that a new era was beginning in United States-Ukrainian relations. Ukraine had moved quickly from being a problem to being a project. The United States would now be involved in Ukraine’s security. Ukraine was the first state to formally join the Partnership for Peace, on February 8, 1994.

The events of that day represent two opposite responses to the security dilemma. The decision to expand NATO represented the classic response envisioned by realist international relations theory. The West 1 The President’s News Conference with President Leonid Kravchuk of Ukraine in Kiev, January 12, 1994, www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=49843.

2 The President’s News Conference with Visegrad Leaders in Prague, January 12, 1994,

www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/the-presidents-news-conference-with-visegrad-

leaders-prague.

65

66

Hope and Hardship, 1994–1999

and the recently freed states in central Europe sought to augment their security even though it would likely engender a negative response from Russia. Clinton’s reference to a potential “lesser outcome” made it clear that NATO expansion was, in part, a hedge against what might happen in Russia.

Ukraine’s denuclearization, in contrast, was a rare response to the security dilemma. Understanding that pursuing security through arms would make others feel less secure, and in turn might make it less secure, Ukraine spurned the weapons. In terms of realist theory, it is irrational for a state to deliberately reduce its military potential, especially when faced with an obvious security threat,3 but Ukraine was in an unusual position. The nuclear weapons on its territory ‒ ownership was disputed

‒ were making it a target of Russian and US coercion, and its newly won independence was threatened more by isolation than attack.

At another press conference, in Moscow on January 14, Yeltsin made clear that he had a different vision for the Partnership for Peace.

This concept is a very important step toward building a security system from Vancouver to Vladivostok that excludes the emergence of new demarcation lines or areas of unequal security. We believe that this idea may prove just one of the scenarios for building a new Europe. Just one of those will well impart very specific cooperation in this dimension of cooperation, including the military area. Of course, we will keep track of other collective security structures in Europe, including such time-tested institutions like the United Nations and the CSCE.4

Yeltsin repeated here the Russian understanding of Europe’s future that Gorbachev had articulated in Strasbourg in 1989 ‒ one undivided and guided largely by organizations ‒ the UN and CSCE ‒ in which Russia wielded a veto. The distinction between Russian and western visions had not changed much in the intervening five years; nor would it in the future.

The final question in that press conference asked Clinton whether Yeltsin supported the recent NATO commitment to using air strikes in Bosnia if the situation there did not improve. Clinton responded: “We’ve all had our differences over Bosnia, and everybody’s got a different idea about it.”5 Yugoslavia was continuing to drive a wedge between the United States and Russia. Their differences became much more heated 3 This case was made by John J. Mearsheimer, “The Case for a Ukrainian Nuclear Deterrent,” Foreign Affairs 72, 3 (Summer 1993): 50‒66.

4 The President’s News Conference with President Boris Yeltsin of Russia in Moscow, January 14, 1994, www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=50021.

5 Ibid.

Hope and Hardship, 1994–1999

67

a few weeks later when Serbian forces shelled a market in Sarajevo, killing sixty-eight people, heightening the international consensus that something must be done, and intensifying disagreement over what that something should be. By the end of 1999, the conflict over Kosovo would nearly bring NATO and Russian forces to blows at Pristina airport.

The period from 1994 until 1999 was one in which Russia, Ukraine, Europe, and the United States struggled to come to terms with the consequences of the events of 1989‒1991. Economic decline continued both in Russia, where “shock therapy” was employed with limited enthusiasm and little success, and in Ukraine, where a “go slow” strategy worked even worse. The 1997‒1998 global economic crisis pummeled both economies and extinguished any remaining zeal for reform. In relations between Ukraine and Russia, two contradictory trends emerged. One was represented by Ukraine’s ongoing establishment of the institutions of an independent state and by Russia’s apparent acceptance of that, symbolized by the signing of a Friendship Treaty between the two states in 1997. The other was the continuing battle over the very same questions, as Russia sought to reassert its influence in the post-Soviet region and to bring Ukraine into its orbit. In many respects, the contradiction mirrored the battle within Russia between Boris Yeltsin and a shrinking group of “westernizers,” on one hand, and a large and increasingly resurgent array of conservatives, leftists, and nationalists, on the other. Ukraine began this period by electing a president committed to closer relations with Russia, but he turned toward the West.

These tensions between Ukraine and Russia were linked to increased tensions between Russia and the West. Disagreement over Yugoslavia, Chechnya, NATO expansion, and economic reform increased mistrust.

Despite the good intentions of Clinton and Yeltsin, the competing goals of the two states could not be bridged, especially with the series of wedges that emerged to drive them apart, including the wars in Yugoslavia and Chechnya and the 1997‒1998 global financial crisis.

By 1999, Ukraine was becoming more autocratic; financial crisis had gutted reform in Russia; and war in Yugoslavia had severely undermined the notion that the West and Russia could agree on a common approach to security. NATO enlargement both reflected that disagreement and exacerbated it. Several of the issues that became the focus of recrimin-ations in 2014 ‒ NATO expansion, the independence of Kosovo, the erosion of democracy in Russia, and the violation of Russian treaty commitments to Ukraine ‒ have their origins in this period.

The challenges were recognized by a 1994 exchange in the journal Foreign Affairs between former National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski and Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev. Brzezinski argued

68

Hope and Hardship, 1994–1999

that “If not openly imperial, the current objectives of Russian policy are at the very least proto-imperial.”6 To counter this, he said, “the central goal of a realistic and long-term grand strategy should be the consolidation of geopolitical pluralism within the former Soviet Union.”7 Ukraine was to be the pivot in this strategy. “It cannot be stressed strongly enough that without Ukraine, Russia ceases to be an empire, but with Ukraine suborned and then subordinated, Russia automatically becomes an empire.”8 Brzezinski had crystallized an emerging consensus that maintaining Ukraine’s independence from Russia was an important security goal.

Kozyrev published a spirited rebuttal in the next issue:

The only policy with any chance of success is one that recognizes the equal rights and mutual benefit of partnership for both Russia and the West, as well as the status and significance of Russia as a world power. Russian foreign policy inevitably has to be of an independent and assertive nature. If Russian democrats fail to achieve it, they will be swept away by a wave of aggressive nationalism, which is now exploiting the need for national and state self-assertion … Russia is predestined to be a great power.9

The exchange highlights that by mid-1994 the United States and Russia had identified largely conflicting goals, and that Ukraine was pivotal in the disagreement. What Russia regarded as essential to its security was seen by Brzezinski and an increasing number of western elites as bad for Russia, bad for its neighbors, and bad for the United States.

Russia Debates Its Role

Kozyrev’s response to Brzezinski reflected an ongoing debate in Russia about its identity and role in the world. Four schools of thought emerged: westernizers, Slavophiles, Eurasianists, and statists or “derzhavniks.”10

6 Zbigniew Brzezinski, “The Premature Partnership,” Foreign Affairs 73 (March/April 1994): 76.

7 Ibid., p. 79, emphasis in original.

8 Ibid., p. 80.

9 Andrei Kozyrev, “The Lagging Partnership,” Foreign Affairs 73 (May/June 1994): 60, emphasis added.

10 As Marlene Laruelle stresses, we should not overstate the coherence of these “schools”

of thought or their direct influence on foreign policy. See Marlene Laruelle, “Russia as a

‘Divided Nation,’ from Compatriots to Crimea,” Problems of Post-Communism 62 (2015): 63. The typology advanced here is compatible with a large literature on post-Soviet Russian foreign policy. For different but comparable typologies, see Andrei Tsygankov,

“Rediscovering National Interests after the ‘End of History’: Fukuyama, Russian Intellectuals, and a Post-Cold War Order,” International Politics 39 (December 2002): 423‒446; and Stephen White, “Elite Opinion and Foreign Policy in Post-Communist

Russia Debates Its Role

69

All four had roots in Russia’s past. By 1996, the westernizers had largely been defeated, and opinion was divided among the others, who all supported Russia’s great power aspirations and an assertive policy on Ukraine.

Westernizers saw Russia becoming a “normal country,” by which they meant a liberal democracy and market economy on the European model.

Westernizers formed the core of Boris Yeltsin’s team in 1991‒1992, but even then they were a small minority among the elite and public. “Slavophiles” conceived of Russia in ethnic, linguistic, and religious (Orthodox) terms. Emblematic of this group was the émigré Nobel prize-winning author Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, who returned to Russia in 1992 and advocated construction of a truly Russian state. This view shunned empire, but considered much of Ukraine to be part of Russia, and insisted that the boundary between Ukraine and Russia be revised accordingly. Whereas the Slavophiles defined Russia narrowly in terms of Russian ethnicity and language, Eurasianists defined Russia expansively, as a multinational and multiethnic state. Like Slavophiles, Eurasianists tended to believe that Russia was fundamentally different and separate from Europe, and that this was to be celebrated. For both the Slavophiles and Eurasianists, reintegration of the Soviet space had a strong cultural dimension, and Ukraine was central to that dimension.11

Finally, there was a group known in the West as “statists,” a translation of the Russian word derzhavniki.” “Great power statist” would be a more accurate translation in this context.12 Derzhavniki saw Russia as a great power and as a strong centralized state. Rather than the mysticism or imperialism that infused Eurasian and Slavophile arguments, they espoused a more traditional realpolitik. Russia, they said, should pursue Russia,” Perspectives on European Politics and Society 8, 2 (June 2007): 147‒167. Ted Hopf uses a tripartite version (“liberals,” “conservatives,” and “centrists”), concluding that centrists, which correspond to my “statists,” were ascendant by the end of 1992. See Ted Hopf, “Identity, Legitimacy, and the Use of Military Force: Russia’s Great Power Identities and Military Intervention in Abkhazia,” Review of International Studies 31

(2005): 225–243. For an analysis that goes up to 2016, see Mariya Y. Omelicheva and Lidiya Zubytska, “An Unending Quest for Russia’s Place in the World: The Discursive Co-evolution of the Study and Practice of International Relations in Russia,” New Perspectives 24, 1 (2016): 19‒51.

11 Michael E. Aleprete, Jr., “Minimizing Loss: Explaining Russian Policy: Choices during the Ukrainian Crisis,” Soviet and Post-Soviet Review 44 (2017): 59.

12 Brian D. Taylor, “The Code of Putinism,” PONARS Eurasia Policy Memo No. 399, November 2015. “[D]erzhavnost’ refers to the state of possessing ‒ and being recognized by others to possess ‒ clear status as a great power.” Seva Gunitsky and Andrei P.

Tsygankov, “The Wilsonian Bias in the Study of Russian Foreign Policy,” Problems of Post-Communism 65, 6 (2018): 385. In his December 1999 speech, quoted below, Putin used the word gosudarstvennichestvo to denote a strong state and derzhavnost’ when he discussed Russia as a great power.

70

Hope and Hardship, 1994–1999

Russian national interests, even when these conflicted with those of the West, which they were naturally bound to do. Yeltsin himself stressed this point: “We are fond of repeating that [Russia] is a great country. And that is indeed the case. So then, in our foreign-policy thinking let us always meet this high standard.”13

While Slavophilism, Eurasianism, and statism were theoretically distinct, they were politically compatible, and leaders tended to borrow from all of them. Crimea was in the “sweet spot” of Russian nationalism because it appealed to both Slavophile and Eurasian conceptions of nationalism.14 The consensus on Ukraine was expressed by Andranik Migranyan: Ukraine would have to rejoin Russia whether it wanted to or not:

Ukraine is a loose, artificial, heterogeneous enthnopolitical formation that has no real chance of forming its own statehood, and the deterioration of the social and economic situation will lead to a further split in this formation along ethnoregional lines and will confront the Ukrainian leadership with a dilemma: either enter into closer economic and military-political integration with Russia, directly or within the CIS framework, in order to preserve Ukraine’s territorial integrity, or the consequence will be Ukraine’s breakup into several parts and possible civil war among the various regions.15

By 1994, consensus had consolidated around a more assertive conception of Russia’s role, merging elements of the Slavophile, Eurasianist, and derzhavnik perspectives. Izvestiya pointed to the “new language of Russia’s political leaders, where even liberals speak with Zhirinovsky’s accent.”16 The replacement of Andrei Kozyrev as foreign minister by the former intelligence chief Yevgeny Primakov in January 1996 institutionalized the change. A commentator said:

There were romantic illusions about the West and a desire to get a tighter grip on power by getting support from firstly the United States against domestic opponents, the “red-browns.” In the ecstasy of convergence the factor of strength, the principle of self-reliance, and the concept of the national, state interest as the foundation of any serious diplomacy and of any statehood were 13 “Strategicheskaia tsel’ – sozdat’ protsvetaiushchuiu stranu: Vystuplenie Prezidenta Rossii v Federal’nom Sobranii,” Rossiiskaya Gazeta, February 25, 1994, quoted in Jim Headley, “Sarajevo, February 1994: The First Russia-NATO Crisis of the Post-Cold War Era,” Review of International Studies 29, 2 (April 2003): 222.

14 Henry E. Hale, “Russian Nationalism and the Logic of the Kremlin’s Actions on Ukraine,” The Guardian, August 29, 2014.

15 Andranik Migranyan, “Russia and the Near Abroad: Setting a New Foreign Policy Course for the Russian Federation,” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, January 12, 1994, pp. 1, 4; translated in Current Digest of the Russian Press, March 9, 1994, pp. 1‒4.

16 Vladimir Nadein, “SShA Opasayutsya Vozrozhdeniya Rossiiskogo Imperializma i Obeshchayut Pozabotit’sya ob Ukrainye,” Izvestiya, February 8, 1994, p. 3.

Ukraine’s 1994 Elections

71

initially forgotten. … Now everyone agrees that Kozyrev’s line in the first Russian years was too pro-American and too ideologized.17

Others pointed to the wary reaction in the United States to Primakov’s appointment, and concluded: “This reaction confirms the correctness of the choice of the President.”18

Speaking on December 30, 1999, just as he was about to become acting president, Putin articulated both the need for Russia to be a great power and for it to have a strong state domestically:

Russia has been and will continue to be a great country. This is due to the inherent characteristics of its geopolitical, economic, cultural existence. They determined the mentality of the Russians and the policy of the state throughout the entire history of Russia … Russia will not soon, if ever, become a second edition, of say, the USA or England, where liberal values have deep historical traditions. For us the state, its institutions and structures have always played a crucially important role in the life of the country and the people. A strong state for Russia is not an anomaly, or something that should be combated, but, on the contrary, the source and guarantor of order, the initiator and the main driving force of any changes.19

Ukraine’s 1994 Elections

Following the signing of the Trilateral Agreement in January 1994, attention in Ukraine shifted to the presidential elections scheduled for June and July. Economic collapse had driven demands for early elections, and the question of economic relations with Russia was a central issue in the presidential campaign. Leonid Kravchuk, the incumbent, had emphasized establishing Ukraine’s sovereignty and independence by separating the country militarily, economically, and politically from Moscow. Many, especially in eastern Ukraine, felt that this policy was responsible for the crash in the Ukrainian economy that followed independence.

Kravchuk’s main competitor was Leonid Kuchma, former prime minister and former industrialist associated with the “Dnipropetrovsk clan,”

from which Leonid Brezhnev had emerged. Kuchma ran on a platform of strengthening economic ties with Russia, supported by a wide range of 17 Stanislav Kondrashov, “Ukhod Vernogo Andreya: Pochemu i chto dal’she?” Izvestiya, January 10, 1996, p. 3.

18 Vladimir Kuznechevsky and Aleksandr Krasulin, “Yevgenii Primakov Ne Ukhodit ot Ostrykh Voprosov,” Rossiiskaya Gazeta, January 16, 1996, p. 7.

19 Vladimir Putin, “Rossiya na Rubezhe Tysyacheletii,” Nesavisimaya Gazeta, December 30, 1999.

72

Hope and Hardship, 1994–1999

economic elites, including Ukraine’s powerful agriculture, machine-building, and metallurgy sectors. All of these had been deeply integrated into Soviet-wide networks, and continued to need them. Many saw the election as a referendum on Kravchuk’s policy of assertively breaking ties with Russia.

Russian elites were clear about their preference for Kuchma: Andranik Migranyan argued that “if this election results in the replacement of the incumbent President, who in the public mind is identified with the west, with Rukh, with the national-patriots and the democrat-patriots, then an entire phase in the establishment of Ukrainian statehood will have ended.”20

While Kravchuk had been the less nationalist of the two candidates in 1991, in 1994 he was the more nationalist of the two. Accordingly, he got most of the vote in western Ukraine, where he had been weakest in 1991, while Kuchma dominated the east and south. Kuchma defeated Kravchuk 52 to 45 percent in the second round. The election reaffirmed Ukraine’s regional divisions and demonstrated the electoral power of eastern Ukraine, with its large population.

In the parliamentary elections, held in March, local authorities in two eastern oblasts, Donetsk and Luhansk, added three “consultative” questions to the ballot about increasing the status of the Russian language, adopting a federal structure, and becoming a full member of the CIS. All three received 80 percent or more support from voters.21 Whether this regionalism equated to separatism was questionable.22

Kuchma’s election, paradoxically, undermined nascent autonomy movements in Crimea and eastern Ukraine. Kuchma was from eastern Ukraine, spoke Russian, was supported by large majorities in the east and south, had campaigned on restoring trade ties, and was openly supported by Russia. His election diminished the sense of grievance in eastern and southern Ukraine. The growing power of eastern Ukraine gave eastern elites and voters incentive to support Ukrainian independence over reintegration with Russia.23 Kuchma promptly reassured Ukrainians that 20 Andranik Migranyan, “Ukraina Nakanune Presidentskykh Vyborov: Predstoyashchie vybory v Belorussii I na Ukraine kak vyzov dlya Rossii,” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, June 22, 1994, pp. 1, 3.

21 Taras Kuzio, Ukrainian Security Policy, Washington Papers #167 (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1995, p. 37.

22 Taras Kuzio, Ukraine-Crimea-Russia: Triangle of Conflict (Stuttgart: ibidem-Verlag, 2007), pp. 40‒57.

23 This phenomenon is explored in more detail in Paul D’Anieri, “Ethnic Tensions and State Strategies: Understanding the Survival of the Ukrainian State,” Journal of Communist Studies and Transition Politics 23, 1 (March 2007): 4‒29. When those

Kuchma’s “Multivector” Foreign Policy

73

“Ukraine’s foreign policy will remain predictable and balanced, based on those fundamental documents that have been adopted in recent years.”24

Kuchma’s “Multivector” Foreign Policy

While he was determined to rebuild trade with Russia, Kuchma faced the same dilemma that Kravchuk had. Ukraine’s dependence on Russia left it vulnerable to coercion. Diversification was essential, and new opportunities were shaping sectoral interests.25 Agriculture remained largely focused on Russia, as world markets were heavily protected. But the machine-building sector began to see more potential for markets in the West. The metallurgy sector divided, according to competitiveness.

Firms that could compete in the EU, which dwarfed Russia as a market, focused on gaining greater access. Those that could not compete in the European Union sought to maintain ties with Russia. Banks were particularly worried about being put out of business by Russian competitors with far more capital.26 Demand for arms from the Soviet military collapsed while the global arms market opened up. In Kuchma’s former business, missiles, Ukraine could compete in the growing global satellite launch market.

Kuchma adopted the notion of a “national bourgeoisie” that merited protection from foreign competition. This suited Ukraine’s emerging oligarchs, and served as a brake on integration with Russia, which would have facilitated the purchase of Ukrainian firms by Russian capital.27

Having denounced the West in 1993, saying that “[t]he west has made it its goal … to ruin everything for us,”28 he adopted what came to be called a “multivector” foreign policy, balancing the West and Russia both eastern elites lost control of the Ukrainian government in 2004, some (including Yanukovych) toyed with separatism. The same thing happened again in 2014.

24 Leonid Kuchma, “Ukrayina Vidkryta dlya Spivrobitnytstva” (speech to the representatives of the diplomatic corps), July 22, 1994, in Leonid Kuchma, Kroky Stanovlennya Natsional’noyi Ekonomiky 1994‒2004 Roky, Knyha Persha, Podolannya Kryzy Radykal’ni Ekonomichni Reformy 1994‒1999 (Kyiv: Lybid’, 2008), p. 49.

25 Tor Bukkvoll, “Defining a Ukrainian Foreign Policy Identity: Business and Geopolitics in the Formulation of Ukrainian Foreign Policy 1994‒1999,” in Jennifer D. P. Moroney, Taras Kuzio, and Mikhail Molchanov, eds., Ukrainian Foreign and Security Policy: Theoretical and Comparative Perspectives (Westport, CT: Praeger, 2002); Rosaria Puglisi, “Clashing Agendas? Economic Interests, Elite Coalitions and Prospects for Co-operation between Russia and Ukraine,” Europe-Asia Studies 55, 6 (2003): 827‒

845; and Hans van Zon, “Political Culture and Neo-Patrimonialism under Leonid Kuchma,” Problems of Post-Communism 52, 5 (2005): 12‒22.

26 Puglisi, “Clashing Agendas?” p. 836.

27 Ibid., pp. 834‒837; see Taras Kuzio, “Neither East nor West, Ukraine’s Security Policy under Kuchma,” Problems of Post-Communism 52, 5 (September/October 2005): 60.

28 Quoted in Bukkvoll, “Defining a Ukrainian Foreign Policy Identity,” p. 131.

74

Hope and Hardship, 1994–1999

economically and geopolitically. The multivector strategy was a domestic as well as an international strategy. By integrating neither with the West nor with Russia, Kuchma and Ukraine’s oligarchs retained maximum latitude internally to seek rents and consolidate their power.29

The balance of oligarchic forces changed further as the battle for control of energy rents increasingly dominated Ukraine’s politics.30 In 1996‒1997, Prime Minister Pavlo Lazarenko consolidated control over the gas market in Ukraine and skimmed off hundreds of millions of dollars. While he was forced from power (and eventually served a prison sentence in the United States for money laundering), the new model stuck. Because gas was subsidized, the sectors that depended on it, notably metallurgy and petrochemicals, were competitive internationally.

Therefore, reducing subsidies would injure powerful oligarchs, undermine employment in eastern Ukraine, and reduce export earnings.31

Ihor Bakai, Chair of the state gas company Naftohaz Ukrainy, said that all the Ukrainian oligarchs had made their fortunes through the distorted energy trade with Russia.32 In return, the oligarchs were expected to kick large sums back to Kuchma’s team and to support them politically. As a result, an increasingly wealthy and powerful group of Ukrainian oligarchs shared an interest in maintaining stable relations between Russia and Ukraine. Overall, oligarchic politics reinforced regional politics in Ukraine, providing support for both pro-European and pro-Russian policies, and making it impossible for either side to completely gain the upper hand.

Trade and the Commonwealth of Independent States

While Ukraine hoped to redirect its foreign policy toward the West, the general agreements it reached with NATO and the European Union did little to actually open up trade opportunities, leaving Ukraine heavily dependent on Russian energy and on the Russian market. As economic performance stagnated, therefore, Kuchma needed to secure concessionary terms from Russia. The essential problem of Ukraine’s independence 29 See Kuzio, “Neither East nor West.”

30 On the role of Ukraine’s oligarchs in the gas trade and on the role of the energy trade in Ukraine-Russia relations, see Anders Åslund, How Ukraine Became a Market Economy and Democracy (Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2009), especially chapter 4; and Margarita Balmaceda, Energy Dependency, Politics and Corruption in the Former Soviet Union (Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge, 2009; and Margarita Balmaceda, The Politics of Energy Dependency: Ukraine, Belarus, and Lithuania between Domestic Oligarchs and Russian Pressure (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2013).

31 Balmaceda, Energy Dependence, Politics and Corruption, p. 34.

32 Puglisi, “Clashing Agendas?” p. 840.

Trade and the Commonwealth of Independent States 75

‒ that it was economically dependent on its primary security threat ‒ had not been mitigated.

While Ukraine’s goal was to gain preferential access to Russian markets and to receive subsidized energy without any strings attached, Russia sought to make such privileges contingent upon accepting Russian economic and political leadership in the region. In October 1994, Ukraine joined the CIS Interstate Commerce Committee, but only with a whole series of reservations. This tactic ‒ appearing to approve an agreement while declaring a series of exceptions ‒ was used frequently. In part this was simply a matter of trying to publicly smooth over ongoing disagreements, but it frustrated Ukraine’s negotiating partners, especially Russia.33

Foreign Minister Zlenko stated: “we consider that Ukraine’s main foreign policy spheres are bilateral state-to-state relations, growing participation in European regional cooperation, cooperation within the CIS, membership in the UN and other universal international organizations.”34 Putting bilateral cooperation and cooperation with European organizations before cooperation with the CIS was certainly meant to reflect priorities. He says that “[t]he process of furthering ties within the CIS will be accompanied by comprehensive cooperation with the European Union.”35 In neither case did Zlenko refer to “integration.”

Similarly, in discussing institutions to promote security, Zlenko mentioned the CSCE, NATO, the NACC (North Atlantic Cooperation Council), and the WEU (Western European Union) but not the CIS.

Kozyrev focused on gaining western support for Russian-led reintegration:

What is wrong with Russia announcing as its goal the gradual reintegration ‒

primarily economic reintegration ‒ of the post-Soviet space on a voluntary and equal basis? The situation is similar to that of the European Union, where the economic leadership of the larger states like France and Germany is recognized.

In the C.I.S., however, even a large and economically developed state like Ukraine cannot manage without close ties to Russia. Is there an alternative? Is the West prepared, for example, to pay for the oil and gas delivered to Ukraine, Georgia and the C.I.S. states from Russia or to take on the payment to Russia of the billion-dollar Ukrainian debt? That is why Russia’s special role and 33 Roman Wolczuk, Ukraine’s Foreign and Security Policy 1991‒2000 (London: RoutledgeCurzon, 2003), p. 66 calculates that of 786 documents signed by the CIS

between 1992 and 1997, Ukraine signed only 558 (71 percent) and attached reservations to 81 of those. Of the 558 signed agreements, 65 required parliamentary ratification, and only 15 received it.

34 Anatoly Zlenko, “The Foreign Policy of Ukraine: Principles of Shaping and Problems of Implementing It,” International Affairs (Moscow) (January 1994): 12‒18.

35 Ibid., p. 17.

76

Hope and Hardship, 1994–1999

responsibility within the former Soviet Union must be borne in mind by its Western partners and given support.36

In September 1994, just before a summit meeting between Yeltsin and Clinton, Yevgeny Primakov, head of Russia’s foreign intelligence service and later prime minister, released a report entitled “Russia-CIS: Is a Change in the West’s Position Needed?” Primakov worried that

“The conclusion is being drawn that the policy of the leading Western countries toward the CIS should be adjusted with the aim of preserving the status quo that was created after the breakup of the Union.”37 On the contrary, he said, “The process of integration is an undoubted fact, and if the negative attitude to it gets rooted in Western capitals, it could strongly cool relations between these capitals and Moscow.”38 He identified a stark choice: either the region would forge a single economy and military under Russian leadership or “[w]ith overt or covert support from outside, forces advocating ‘isolated development’ will gain the upper hand in Russia and the other Commonwealth countries.”39

Primakov’s report was widely discussed (and printed in its entirety in Rossiiskaya Gazeta, the government newspaper), and it highlights the view that there was no alternative to integration. Moreover, Primakov believed that if Russia and its neighbors did not reintegrate, it would be due to “overt or covert support from outside forces.” He did not believe they could choose this path themselves, due to the objective forces he pointed to. And he already suspected the West of trying to harm Russia by dividing it from its near abroad.

Speaking at the UN a few days later, Yeltsin endorsed Primakov’s position, saying that Russia’s “economic and foreign policy priorities lie in the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States … Russia’s ties with them are closer than traditional neighborhood relations; rather, this is a blood relationship.” He went on to say that “The main peacekeeping burden in the territory of the former Soviet Union lies upon the Russian Federation” and that “the people of Russia will not understand if I don’t say now [that] the independent states have to prove through their actions that guaranteeing the human rights of national minorities is 36 Kozyrev, “The Lagging Partnership,” p. 69.

37 “Nuzhdaetsya Li v Korrectirovkye Pozitsiya Zapada?” Rossiiskaya Gazeta, September 22, 1994, p. 1.

38 David Hearst, “Russia Directs Salvo at the West: Yeltsin’s Intelligence Chief Gets Blunt about ‘Double Standards’,” The Guardian, September 22, 1994, p. 13.

39 Primakov asserted that in contrast to the United States, which intervened without the approval of those states’ governments, Russia participated in peacekeeping only at the invitation of the governments.

Trade and the Commonwealth of Independent States 77

indeed the cornerstone of their foreign policy. And here neither selective approaches nor double standards are permissible.”40

Yeltsin advisor Sergei Kortunov echoed Primakov’s argument that only western interference impeded the natural tendency for Ukraine to reintegrate with Russia:

The direction of priority in Russia’s policy in the CIS are relations with Ukraine.

In perspective, our relations must acquire an allied character; moreover, there are essentially no serious obstacles ‒ not economic, nor cultural or civilizational, not even military or political ‒ for the development of such an alliance. The basic problem here is external: the attempts of the US and other large countries not to allow a reunion of Russia and Ukraine, which would lead to the formation of a powerful state in Eurasia, almost of the same scale as was the former USSR. On the other hand, without a strategic alliance with Ukraine, Russia will not become a genuinely great power which would in reality be appreciated, respected and addressed as a real power in the new system of international relations. The departure of Ukraine from Russia, the conversion of brotherly Ukraine into a good-neighborly state, and later, into simply a neighboring state would be a strategic loss for Russia, not compensated neither by the number of stations in Sevastopol, nor the contracts for joint deliveries.41

In March 1996, Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan signed a new deal “On Deepening Integration” that was presented as building something akin to the European Union.42 Without Ukrainian membership, this and other similar initiatives withered. Kuchma resisted but also sought to reassure Russia that it would not quickly move toward the West. “As the largest of Europe’s non-bloc countries, Ukraine understands that under current conditions, its hypothetical joining of existing military-political groups could damage the international security system,” and that that “Ukraine’s future does not necessarily have to be non-bloc.”43 When Ukraine declined to join, Russia lost interest, as a major point of all such proposals was to bring Ukraine back into the fold.

The discussions in this period brought up again the question of Ukraine’s neutrality or “non-bloc” status, which had been mentioned as an intention in the 1990 sovereignty declaration, and which many took to be a commitment. For those who wanted to resist integration with Russia, non-bloc status offered the perfect argument as to why Ukraine 40 John M. Goshko, “Yeltsin Claims Russian Sphere of Influence: Regional Peacekeeping Role Asserted,” Washington Post, September 27, 1994, p. A10.

41 Sergei Kortunov, “Russia in Search of Allies,” International Affairs (Moscow) 42, 3

(1996): 148.

42 Wolczuk, Ukraine’s Foreign and Security Policy, p. 63.

43 Tatyana Ivzhenko, “Solana Na Ukraine i v Pribaltike,” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, April 17, 1996, p. 1.

78

Hope and Hardship, 1994–1999

could not join the various projects put forth through the CIS and other formats. For opponents of collaboration with NATO, it offered a similar obstacle. For those advocating closer relations with NATO, collaboration short of membership did not violate Ukraine’s non-bloc status.

Ukraine’s non-bloc status, even if not official, represented a compromise between competing perspectives of the country’s future.

Crimea

The internal situation in Crimea threatened to boil over in 1994. In January, Crimeans elected Yuriy Meshkov, a pro-Russia separatist, to the newly created position of president of the autonomous republic.44

Meshkov appointed a Russian citizen as premier, ignoring a warning from Ukraine’s parliament to abide by the Ukrainian constitution. He then sought to hold a referendum on Crimean secession, but when this was rejected as unconstitutional, he instead held a nonbinding “opinion poll” to coincide with the first round of Ukraine’s parliamentary elections in March.45 One of the questions was whether Crimea’s relations with Ukraine should be governed by a bilateral treaty, such as that which had been devised between Tatarstan and Moscow; one was on dual citizen-ship; and one was on increased autonomy. All received more than 75 percent support.

The Ukrainian parliament, divided on so many other things, passed a resolution condemning the poll and enacted laws against several of the steps taken by Crimean leaders. Chairman Ivan Plyushch said that Ukraine “can no longer tolerate violations of the constitution by the Crimean authorities,” and blamed “Chauvinistic politicians from …

Russia, who inherited their traits from the former USSR.”46 While some counseled taking decisive action before Crimea could consolidate independence, others feared that pursuit of a military solution would foster what had happened in Georgia, namely de facto partition. Kravchuk, while insisting that the Crimean actions were unconstitutional, did nothing other than pointing out that Crimea would be in deep trouble economically if it were cut off from Ukraine. “Let’s speak frankly.

Crimea today is a region which is subsidized by Ukraine. We don’t have 44 This episode is discussed in detail in Kuzio, Ukraine-Crimea-Russia, pp. 129‒140.

45 Kuzio, Ukrainian Security Policy, p. 38.

46 The quotations are from the AP, February 25, 1994 and Holos Ukrainy, March 1, 1994, both quoted in Kuzio, Ukraine-Crimea-Russia, p. 135.

Crimea

79

to go into all the figures, there’s energy, water, etc. As the Russian saying goes, don’t try to wear clothes that don’t fit.”47

In the summer of 1994, the city council in Sevastopol voted to transfer the city to Russian jurisdiction. The new Kuchma administration rapidly denounced the move as contradicting Ukraine’s constitution and having no legal authority. From this high point of tension, the situation diffused, for several reasons. First, there were deepening conflicts within Crimea, and Meshkov rapidly lost political support. The Soviet-era communist

“party of power” in Crimea, led by former speaker Nikolai Bagrov, whom Meshkov had succeeded, fought back. That group envisioned more influence in an independent Ukraine. Already in May 1994, a delegation from the Crimean parliament, led by Sergei Tsekov, met with one from the Ukrainian parliament led by the communist deputy Boris Oleinik, with Tsekov declaring that “the Republic of Crimea does not intend to secede from Ukraine.”48

Second, the election of Kuchma changed the situation there as it had in Donbas. Having just won nearly 90 percent of the vote in Crimea, Kuchma had considerable political capital, and the narrative of a nationalist government in Kyiv no longer made sense. To deal with competing resolutions between the Crimean parliament and Meshkov, Kuchma proposed a “cooling off” period and a “zero-option” under which all of the controversial resolutions would be repealed.49 He also pointed out that resolutions concerning the jurisdiction over Crimea and the institution of the President of Crimea were unconstitutional: “I could sign a decree right now and rescind all Meshkov’s resolutions.”50 In the spring of 1995, Kuchma signed a decree abolishing the Crimean presidency.

There was little fuss about it and the question of separatism from within Crimea moved to the back burner, both on the peninsula and in Kyiv.

Russia could have poured oil on this fire, but did not. In February, after Meshkov’s election, Prime Minister Chernomyrdin stated that

“Ukraine need not fear that Russia’s position will change.”51 In August, after the Sevastopol city council’s actions, a Yeltsin spokesperson reaffirmed that the matter “must be guided by the principles of the 47 Quoted in Kuzio, Ukrainian Security Policy, p. 39.

48 Vladimir Gavrilenko and Anatolii Polyakov, “Sobytiya i Kommentarii: Led Vokrug Kryma, Pokhozhe, Tronulsya,” Krasnaya Zvezda, May 26, 1994, p. 3.

49 Nikolay Semenov, “Meshkov Stremitsyak ‘Nulyevomu’ Variantu, Parlament Kryma Eto ne Ustraivaet,” Izvestiya, September 24, 1994, p. 2.

50 Yanina Sokolovskaya, “… A Kiev Daet Krymskim Vlastyam 40 Dney na Razmyshleniya,” Izvestia, September 24, 1994, p. 2.

51 Reuters, February 19, 1994, quoted in Kuzio, Ukrainian Security Policy, p. 38.

80

Hope and Hardship, 1994–1999

integrity of the CIS states and the inviolability of the CIS countries’

borders.”52 Kuchma praised Russia for “acting prudently and … making no statements, understanding that this an internal affair of Ukraine.”53

Russia’s restraint in this instance shows that, despite its claims on the peninsula, Russia was not pulling all the levers at its disposal. Russia’s reluctance to support Crimean secession, even though many Russian elites supported it, may have been motivated by the fact that Ukraine’s denuclearization was incomplete, and could have been reversed if Crimea were to secede. Taras Kuzio speculates that, as well, Russia may have felt that it would have more leverage with Crimea inside Ukraine (as with Transnistria in Moldova and Abkhazia in Georgia), than with it outside.54

The Black Sea Fleet and the 1997 Friendship Treaty

Ukraine and Russia hoped to sign a Friendship Treaty that would solidify their bilateral relations, but could not do so until the status of the Black Sea Fleet was resolved. Ukraine made further concessions in 1995, accepting a smaller share of the fleet and agreeing that the port of Sevastopol would remain the primary base for the Russian Black Sea Fleet. Ukrainian critics contended that having a foreign base on Ukrainian soil violated the Ukrainian constitution and legitimized Russia’s claims to Sevastopol and the presence of its troops there.55

In May 1995, Yeltsin advisor Dmitry Ryurikov expressed Yeltsin’s frustration that with Russia having agreed to the restructuring of Ukraine’s debt, Ukraine did not make expected concessions on Sevastopol and the Black Sea Fleet. Ryurikov said “Yeltsin suggested that the Ukrainian side draw conclusions, and if there is no movement toward accommodation, it appears that Russia will start reconsidering the agreements reached with Ukraine on economic and financial matters.”56

However, Russia was constrained from turning the economic screws on 52 Dmitry Kuznets, “Russian Politicians Don’t Intend to Take Sevastopol: An Official in the Russian President’s Administration Supports Leonid Kuchma’s Position,” Sevodnya, August 25, 1994, p. 2, in Current Digest of the Russian Press, No. 34, Vol. 46, September 21, 1994, p. 22.

53 Quoted by Viktor Yadukha and Konstantin Parishkura, “‘Zero Option’ Remains Up in the Air: Both Sides Assert They Are Ready for Talks,” Sevodnya, September 14, 1994, p. 1, in Current Digest of the Russian Press, No. 37, Vol. 46, October 12, 1994, pp. 6‒7.

54 Kuzio, Ukrainian Security Policy, p. 38.

55 Wolczuk, Ukraine’s Foreign and Security Policy, pp. 30‒31, 37.

56 Georgy Bovt and Natalya Kalashnikova, “Russian-Ukrainian Talks: Agreements with Ukraine Might Be Reconsidered,” Kommersant-Daily, April 20, 1995, p. 1, translated in Current Digest of the Russian Press, No. 16, Vol. 47, May 17, 1995, p. 24.

The Black Sea Fleet and the 1997 Friendship Treaty 81

Ukraine too tightly, because it was receiving assistance from international financial institutions, and they did not want to see Ukraine’s economic situation deteriorate dramatically.57 A planned trip by Yeltsin to Kyiv to sign a treaty in September 1995 was delayed because disagreement remained over the issue of basing rights.

Yeltsin was then scheduled to go to Ukraine in April 1996 to sign the Friendship and Cooperation Treaty, but he postponed the trip again over the basing rights issue. With the Russian presidential election approaching, and with Yeltsin under fire from revanchists, he had powerful domestic incentives to avoid making concessions. “By replacing Kozyrev with Primakov and tacking to the right, Yeltsin was largely successful in taking foreign policy off the agenda in the election. …

Primakov neutralized the national-patriotic trump cards of the opposition, because he himself used them together with Yeltsin, actively and forcefully defending Russian interests and independence.”58 Once Yeltsin was reelected in July, he had more latitude to negotiate, but hardliners resumed their campaign on Sevastopol, and on October 16 the Duma passed a measure (334‒1) prohibiting the division of the fleet and denying Ukrainian sovereignty over Sevastopol. They followed it up on October 24 with a resolution stating that Sevastopol remained under Moscow’s jurisdiction.59 In December, the Federation Council overwhelmingly (110‒14)60 endorsed the Duma’s resolution. Yegor Stroyev, the chairman of the Federation Council, said “Sevastopol is a town of Russian Glory. So they voted correctly.”61

In October 1996, Aleksandr Lebed, who had led Russian forces in Moldova and had recently been appointed Secretary of Russia’s National Security Council, published an open letter entitled “Sevastopol is a Russian City,” stating that “The question must be raised of the existence of a territorial dispute between Russia and Ukraine, with consideration of Russia’s right to Sevastopol from a historical perspective.”62 A 1997 poll showed 70 percent of Russians supporting the transfer of Sevastopol to Russia.63 These votes were not legally binding, and Yeltsin distanced himself. But members of his “Our Home is Russia” faction in parliament and his appointees to the Federation Council voted for the resolutions on Sevastopol.64 It was clear that even if the Russian government grudgingly 57 Ibid., p. 24.

58 Stanislav Kondrashov, “Diplomaticheskoe Evangelie ot Yevgeniya v Kanun Vtorogo Votsareniya Boryisa,” Izvestia, August 9, 1996, p. 3.

59 Wolczuk, Ukraine’s Foreign and Security Policy, p. 31.

60 Kuzio, Ukraine-Crimea-Russia, p. 76.

61 Quoted in ibid., pp. 75‒76.

62 Kommersant, October 13, 1996, p. 3.

63 Kuzio, Ukraine-Crimea-Russia, p. 110.

64 Ibid., p. 112.

82

Hope and Hardship, 1994–1999

acknowledged Ukraine’s sovereignty and borders, much of its elite and its democratically elected parliament did not.

Even at this time, the potential for Ukraine to join NATO, however distant, colored the negotiations. Some speculated that Russia might want to maintain a border disagreement with Ukraine, since NATO

had announced it would not consider new members with outstanding territorial disputes. Others believed that Russia sought a commitment that Ukraine would not join NATO in return for a Black Sea Fleet deal.

Others worried that Russia’s position on Crimea was increasing Ukrainian interest in NATO membership.65

At the same time, Ukraine’s domestic politics were easing the path to agreement. In June 1996, Kuchma rammed a new Ukrainian constitution through parliament. While a prohibition on foreign bases remained, a “transitional provision” stated: “The use of existing military bases on the territory of Ukraine for the temporary stationing of foreign military formations is possible on the terms of lease.”66 This paved the way for a lease deal to be finalized.

In the first half of 1997, a deal came together. If Ukraine felt pressure due to its energy dependence on Russia, Russia may have felt that a deal would slow Ukraine’s move to increased cooperation with NATO.

A Ukraine-NATO “Charter on a Distinctive Partnership” was due to be signed in July at the Madrid summit (at which NATO officially decided to offer membership to the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland). On May 27, the NATO-Russia Founding Act was signed, and the Black Sea Fleet deal and Friendship Treaty followed within a week.

The Black Sea Fleet was divided, part of Ukraine’s share was transferred back to Russia to defray Ukraine’s debt to Russia, and port facilities and a base in Sevastopol were leased to Russia through 2017.

Most important for Ukraine, Article 2 of the Treaty stated: “In accord with provisions of the UN Charter and the obligations of the Final Act on Security and Cooperation in Europe, the High Contracting Parties shall respect each other’s territorial integrity and reaffirm the inviolability of the borders existing between them.”

The signing of the Friendship Treaty largely ended agitation within Crimea for closer political ties with Russia.67 But it did not quell demands from officials in Moscow that Russia take control of Sevastopol. Part of the reason why separatism diminished in Crimea (and never 65 See James Sherr, “Russia-Ukraine Rapprochement? The Black Sea Fleet Accords,”

Survival 39, 3 (Autumn 1997): 28.

66 Ukrainian Constitution, Chapter XV, Paragraph 14.

67 Kuzio, Ukraine-Crimea-Russia, p. 33.

Bosnia Drives a Wedge

83

really got going in the Donbas) is that Ukraine’s most pro-Russian party, the Communist Party of Ukraine (CPU) strongly supported Ukraine’s territorial integrity. Its goal was not to divide Ukraine, but to have all of Ukraine align more closely with Russia. The CPU’s leader, Petro Symo-nenko, complained that “certain media are currently trying to portray the Communist Party of Ukraine as the enemy of the country’s territorial integrity. I once again repeat that the Communists consider the Crimea and Sevastopol as inalienable parts of Ukraine.”68

Bosnia Drives a Wedge

No issue did more to corrode relations between the West and Russia than the war in Yugoslavia. The conflict seemed perfectly designed to drive them apart, pitting Russia’s concerns for a traditional ally and its own status with the West’s determination not to stand aside while genocide took place in Europe. While the war in Yugoslavia and the argument over what to do about it did not directly affect Ukraine, it helped drive the resentment in Russia that formed the context of subsequent events.

There was disagreement both within the West and between the West and Russia over the wisdom of using force to stop the violence in Yugoslavia. Many believed that the use of external force would make things worse, not better.69 But as ethnic cleansing continued, the West became less patient, and Russia increasingly appeared to be an obstacle to ending the violence. The West, viewing Serbia as the cause of much of the violence, sought to coerce Serbia to submit to international peace plans. A commentary in Pravda lamented: “And what if the Serbs, our traditional comrades-in-arms, call for help from their ‘Russian brothers’?

This has happened in other times … How insulting to our country, how bitter for Russia, which still hasn’t yet said a single pointed word that world would have heard.”70

Tension between the United States and Russia over Yugoslavia heightened after Serbian forces shelled a marketplace in Sarajevo, on February 5, 1994, killing sixty-eight people. United Nations Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali asked NATO to agree to launch airstrikes at the UN’s request. Russia objected. Izvestiya quoted a high-ranking Foreign Ministry official as saying: “We do not accept Boutros-68 Vseukrainskiye Vedomosti, January 15, 1997, quoted in Kuzio, Ukraine-Crimea-Russia, p. 34.

69 Mike Bowker, “The Wars in Yugoslavia: Russia and the International Community,”

Europe-Asia Studies 50, 7 (1998): 1245‒1261.

70 Evgeniy Fadeev, “Stervyatniki,” Pravda, August 11, 1993, p. 7.

84

Hope and Hardship, 1994–1999

Ghali’s argument and do not believe that the current events fall under the previous resolution of the Security Council. Consultation with the members of the Security Council is required … Until the responsibility of the Serbs is proven, the international community should not take any steps.”71 Krasnaya Zvezda, asserting “the guilt of the Muslim authorities for the tragedy in the Sarajevo market,” argued that “the persistence with which NATO insists on bombing only Serbian positions calls into question the objectivity of this organization in Yugoslav conflict resolution …

If there is to be an ultimatum, it should be presented to all three sides, not just the Serbs.”72 In the West, questioning responsibility of the Serb forces for the attack appeared disingenuous.

Yeltsin insisted that “[w]e will not allow this problem to be resolved without the participation of Russia.”73 In 1992, Russia had supported a UN Security Council resolution (757) imposing sanctions on Serbia, and in 1993 Russia had endorsed the use of force to protect the “safe havens”

established in Bosnia, but by 1994 it was unwilling to support measures that would likely lead to action against Serbia. Sergei Lavrov told the Duma that Russia would veto any new proposal to authorize force.74

NATO nonetheless issued a threat that any heavy weapons or offensive fighting within a 20 kilometer “exclusion zone” around Sarajevo would be subject to NATO airstrikes.

The Russian envoy to the region, Vitaly Churkin, brokered a deal under which Serbian forces would withdraw from positions around Sarajevo, and Russian troops would be placed there to ensure that Bosnian forces did not occupy the positions. The deal was welcomed by some in the West as a compromise that kept Russia and the West together, and was lauded in the Russian press as a victory for Russia and as a sign of its continuing relevance. The need for NATO airstrikes was temporarily averted, but Russia and the West reached very different conclusions. NATO and the United States learned that credible threats were needed to halt Serbian aggression. Russia learned that diplomacy, 71 Maksim Iusin, “Posle tragedii v Saraevo NATO skloniaetsia k reshitel’nym deistviiam protiv serbov: Moskva prizyvaet k sderzhannosti,” Izvestiia, February 8, 1994, pp. 1, 3.

72 Sergei Sidorov, “Vzryv v Sarayevo: Provokatsiya Musul’manskikh Ekstremistov,”

Krasnaya Zvezda, February 10, 1994. In a later article, citing Slobodan Milosevic, the same author insisted on the need to analyze “which of the belligerents in Bosnia has extracted political benefits from the crime.” Sergei Sidorov, “Iz Belgrada: Serby Prizyvayut Moskvu Dovesti do Kontsa Rassledovanie Vzryva v Sarayevo,” Krasnaya Zvezda, February 16, 1994.

73 Vasiliy Kononenko, “V Moskvye Meidzhoru Prishlos’ Opravdyvat’sya za Neterpenie Zapada v Bosniiskom Konfliktye,” Izvestiia, February 16, 1994, p. 3.

74 Headley, “Sarajevo, February 1994,” pp. 213‒215.

Bosnia Drives a Wedge

85

rather than force, had resolved the problem, and that problems could not be solved without Russia.75

A new irritant emerged at the same time. On February 21, 1994, Aldrich Ames, a high-ranking CIA counterintelligence officer, was charged with spying for Russia. Some took it for granted that allies spied on one another; after all, the agents Ames betrayed were Russians spying for the United States. But to many, the case seemed to show that the end of the Cold War had not changed anything, and the fact that Russia was spying on the United States while the United States was providing it with aid was galling.

Senators from both parties requested a suspension in aid to Russia while the case was investigated, but the Clinton administration resisted.76 The Russian reaction to the scandal did not help: When the United States requested that Russia voluntarily withdraw a senior intelligence service employee from Washington, Russia refused. When the United States then expelled him, a tit-for-tat expulsion further reminded people of the Cold War. United States Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole stated: “Congressional and public support for aid to Russia will not endure in this environment.”77 As Raymond Garthoff wrote, “That such uproar could occur showed the fragility of the new American-Russian relationship of partnership.”78

When NATO attacked Serb ground positions in April 1994, citing a UN resolution authorizing the use of force to protect UN peacekeepers, Yeltsin was enraged. Not only was NATO seemingly escalating the conflict unilaterally, but it was putting him in an exceedingly difficult position domestically. Russia reacted similarly in August 1995 when NATO increased bombing of Serb positions in Bosnia. By helping the Bosnian-Croat federation gain the territory allotted to it under the plan agreed by the “Contact Group,” this campaign helped pave the way to the November 1995 Dayton Peace Agreement. But Russia was again outraged, with the government newspaper saying that the Bosnian Serbs 75 Ibid., p. 220; Kozyrev, “The Lagging Partnership,” p. 66.

76 Douglas Jehl, “A Question of Espionage: Clinton Cautious in Rebuking Russia,” New York Times, February 24, 1994, p. B8; Daniel Williams, “U.S. Calls End to Spy Incident: Administration Shifts to ‘Basics’ on Russia,” Washington Post, March 1, 1994, p. A12.

77 “Clinton Warns Russia on Spying but Won’t Freeze Aid,” St. Louis Post-Dispatch, February 24, 1994, p. 1A.

78 Raymond L. Garthoff, The Great Transition: American-Soviet Relations and the End of the Cold War (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1994), p. 790.

86

Hope and Hardship, 1994–1999

were “in effect threatened with genocide”79 and Pravda headlining

“Today Serbia, Tomorrow Russia.”80

Bosnia put Russia in a bind. It did not want to sacrifice its relationship with the West to support Serbia, but it saw the West’s approach as further undermining both Russia’s position in the new Europe and the rules of the game more broadly. The West saw a different dilemma. Many did not want to use force in Yugoslavia, especially over the objections of Russia and without clear Security Council authorization. But the promise “never again,” adopted after the Holocaust, pulled powerfully at western consciences, and Russia’s foiling of efforts to stop ethnic cleansing puzzled and angered many.

Had Russia accepted that genocide was taking place, and supported action in the Security Council, the principle of Security Council approval could have been maintained without the West feeling that it was acquiescing in genocide. It is unclear why Russia resisted the use of force so resolutely. One hypothesis is that the policy was driven by Serbia’s status as a tsarist-era ally and by notions of Orthodox unity. A second interpretation is that Russia was fighting to reestablish the understanding that it had a veto power in postcommunist Europe. Vitaly Churkin, the Russian envoy on Yugoslavia, said in 1993 that “the question is about the need to confirm our role as a great state.”81 In this vein, Russian journalist Konstantin Eggert criticized what he viewed as the “one-sided pro-Serbian position taken by Moscow solely to spite Washington.”82

Another factor might have been a desire to reject the practice of secession, since Russia was still reeling from the breakup of the Soviet Union and was threatened with further separatism.

It is unclear how subsequent relations between NATO and Russia might have been different if NATO had not had to choose between overriding Russia’s veto and letting ethnic cleansing continue in Yugoslavia.83 Eggert asserted that Russia’s policy prolonged the war but did not yield influence, and that another option had been open: “In 1993 …

some ministry experts advised Andrei Kozyrev and the Presidential 79 Rossiiskaya Gazeta, September 14, 1995, quoted in Bowker, “The Wars in Yugoslavia,”

p. 1254.

80 Nikolay Krivomazov, “Segodnya-Serbiya, Zavtra-Rossiya,” Pravda, September 14, 1995.

81 A. Pushkov, “Golos Rossii Dolzhen Zvuchat’ Na Balkanakh” [interview with Churkin], Moskovskie Novosti, March 21, 1993, p. 15. Quoted in Headley, “Sarajevo, February 1994,” p. 212.

82 Konstantin Eggert, “‘Derzhavnaya’ Vneshnaya Politika Stoit Slishkom Dorogo,”

Izvestia, December 16, 1995, p. 3.

83 Ibid.

Kuchma and the United States

87

circle: ‘We need to gradually curtail active policy in the former Yugoslavia, since we have neither real allies nor major interests there.’”

The consequences of the conflict were far-reaching. As it turned out, Yugoslavia undermined the principal of the veto, rather than reinforcing it, and it strengthened NATO rather than weakening it. It showed that in any organization where Russia wielded a veto, dealing with a problem like Bosnia might be impossible. It also demonstrated the essential importance of NATO in post-Cold War security in Europe. Richard Holbrooke, the main US negotiator on Yugoslavia, became a main force within the Clinton administration in support of NATO expansion.84 The overlap between the discussion of NATO expansion and the Bosnia conflict was deeply injurious to Russia’s hopes for the post-Cold War security order in Europe.

Kuchma and the United States

Ukraine’s ratification of the NPT as a nonnuclear weapons state, in November 1994, removed the final obstacle to US support for Ukraine, and in late November Kuchma made a state visit to Washington. In addition to receiving praise from US officials, Kuchma returned with $900 million in aid pledges, as well a commitment from the IMF to disburse $370 million of a $700 million loan package. This aid provided essential support to the ravaged Ukrainian economy, and along with Ukraine’s participation in the Partnership for Peace it symbolized the new collaborative relationship between the United States and Ukraine.

A further step that was to have important repercussions in 2014 came in December 1994 at the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) summit in Budapest, when the United States and Britain, along with Russia, signed the Budapest Memorandum guaranteeing Ukraine’s security and its borders. This was the final part of the deal struck at the beginning of the year for Ukraine to surrender its weapons. While it was recognized that the declaration would not compel anyone to do (or not do) anything, it was regarded as significantly reassuring Ukraine that Russia would not use force and that the United States and United Kingdom would respond if it did.

In May 1995, the deepening bilateral relationship between the United States and Ukraine was marked by President Clinton’s visit to Kyiv.

Clinton stated his support unambiguously: “The US strongly supports 84 James M. Goldgeier, “NATO Expansion: Anatomy of a Decision,” The Washington Quarterly 21 (Winter 1998): 86. See also James M. Goldgeier, Not Whether but When: The US Decision to Enlarge NATO (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 1999).

88

Hope and Hardship, 1994–1999

an independent, democratic, stable and prosperous Ukraine that is becoming more deeply integrated into Europe. We support it because this kind of Ukraine interests us as a key political and economic partner, and also as a real force for stabilization in Europe.”85

In 1998, a conflict over selling nuclear energy systems to Iran was resolved in a way that, while little noticed, showed how much influence the United States had over Ukraine, even when it went head-to-head with Russia. At issue was a Russian agreement to help Iran build a nuclear power station at Bushehr. The Ukrainian firm Turbatom, in Kharkiv, had a subcontract to build turbines for the facility, and the United States pressured Ukraine to cancel the contract. Faced with the loss of revenue and Russian ire on one side, and potential aid and US ire on the other side, Ukraine acquiesced to the US demand. In return, the United States supported Ukraine’s accession to the Missile Technology Control Regime, which would make it eligible to participate in the international space launch business. This was particularly attractive to Kuchma, who had run Ukraine’s largest missile factory.86

Ukraine and NATO

The burgeoning US relationship with Ukraine was matched by increasing Ukrainian interaction with NATO. When NATO announced its Partnership for Peace, the reaction was mixed. Those who hoped for rapid accession, such as the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland, worried that the Partnership would be used to put them in a holding pattern, possibly permanently. Ukraine, however, had no chance of joining the alliance in the foreseeable future and feared that NATO

expansion “would leave Ukraine in a grey zone between an enlarged NATO and Russia.”87 Thus, already in 1994, the dynamic existed in which Ukraine’s fear of being on the wrong side of a new dividing line pushed it to seek NATO protection. Foreign Minister Zlenko stated: 85 Clinton is quoted in Vladimir Skachko, “Kiev Nadeetsya Na Poddershku Vashingtona,”

Nezavisimaya Gazeta, May 12, 1995, p. 1.

86 Vitaly Panov, “Amerikanskii Zhuravl’ Protiv Iranskoi Sinitsy,” Rossiiskaya Gazeta, March 11, 1998, p. 7.

87 Ukrainian Ambassador to Belgium Volodymyr Vasylenko, quoted in the Wall Street Journal, January 7‒8, 1994, quoted in Kuzio, Ukrainian Security Policy, p. 57. Steven Pifer reports that Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Borys Tarasiuk, in a visit to Washington in October 1994, stressed the fear that “Ukraine would be consigned to a no-man’s land or a gray zone of insecurity.” Steven Pifer, The Eagle and the Trident: US-Ukraine Relations in Turbulent Times (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 2017), p. 92.

Ukraine and NATO

89

I must underline that the problem is by no means “Ukrainian.” This is evident from an active search for security guarantees by Poland, Czechia, the Baltic countries, other Central and East European states. The disintegration of the Warsaw bloc left a security vacuum in this part of the continent, and practically all the new independent states expressed a desire to cooperate and eventually to join NATO and the WEU in order to ensure their national security. For various reasons, however, NATO will hardly be able to extend its membership in the foreseeable future by placing new independent states under its umbrella. Thus a whole group of countries, Ukraine among them, is experiencing common difficulties.88

After the supposedly pro-Russian Kuchma replaced Kravchuk in July 1994, Ukraine’s enthusiasm for the PfP strengthened. This fit with Kuchma’s “multivector” foreign policy. A high degree of interdependence with Russia was a fact of life whether Ukrainian leaders liked it or not. That necessitated a counterweight. Not only would cooperation with NATO help offset Russian influence, but the threat of aligning with the West was viewed as a useful lever in getting Russia to ease its pressure.89 Ukraine was therefore the PfP’s most eager participant, seeking to join in as many joint exercises and other activities as possible. It stressed its commitment by contributing 400 troops to the Implementation Force (IFOR) that NATO deployed in Bosnia in December 1995.

In January 1995, Kuchma proposed a “Charter on a Distinctive Partnership between Ukraine and NATO.” Foreign Minister Hennadiy Udovenko caused a stir in mid-1996 when he discussed the potential for Ukraine to become an “Associate Member” of NATO (a category that did not exist). Though Kuchma disavowed Udovenko’s statement, it was noticed in Moscow, where Arkadiy Moshes, after dismissing the chances of Ukraine joining NATO in the foreseeable future, wrote: “At the same time, politicians in Kiev must be given to understand that Ukraine’s declaring the goal of joining NATO will be viewed as a shift to an openly unfriendly policy toward Russia, with all the resulting consequences.”90

In March 1997, Udovenko went further, surprising NATO interlocutors at a meeting in Brussels by saying: “I hope that NATO will back Ukraine in its efforts to achieve its strategic goal of complete integration into European and Euro-Atlantic security structures, including NATO.”91

Later that year, he voiced concern that NATO enlargement would lead 88 Zlenko, “The Foreign Policy of Ukraine,” p. 16.

89 Kuzio, Ukraine-Crimea-Russia, pp. 81‒82.

90 Arkadiy Moshes, “Zybkii neutralitet Ukrainy,” Moskovskiye Novosti, No. 26, June 30‒

July 7, 1996, p. 10.

91 Aleksandr Koretsky, “NATO Border Could Come Up to Belgorod: Kiev Wants into NATO despite Older Brother’s Wishes,” Sevodnya, March 22, 1997, pp. 1, 4, in Current Digest of the Russian Press, No. 12, Vol. 49, April 23, 1997, pp. 17‒18.

90

Hope and Hardship, 1994–1999

to the deployment of nuclear weapons in Ukraine’s western neighbors, and recommended the creation of a nuclear-weapons-free zone in central Europe, which NATO opposed due to the key role the nuclear

“umbrella” would play in guaranteeing the new members’ security.

Ukrainian leaders further sought “article 5-like” security guarantees, which NATO also rejected.92

While working closely with NATO through PfP, Ukraine also sought to reinforce its connections with Poland, which was on track to join the alliance. Poland was to become an important advocate for Ukraine in both NATO and the European Union. In March 1994, the two states signed a document “On Principles of the Establishment of Polish-Ukrainian Partnership” that referred to the need to prevent hegemonic tendencies or spheres of influence from arising in the region, an obvious reference to shared fears of Russia.93

In May 1997 Polish President Aleksander Kwaśniewski visited Kyiv to sign a “Declaration on Agreement and Unity.” Poland clearly recognized the danger of Ukraine being isolated between NATO and Russia, and sought to help.94 A “senior Polish diplomat” was quoted in the Wall Street Journal as saying:

We would not like to become part of NATO if the price for that would be giving Ukraine back to Russia … Basically, [the Ukrainians] say that bordering the Western system would be beneficial and would enhance their independence and security too ‒ provided that NATO expansion would not be a deal with Russia that Poland gets in, but the dividing line is the Bug River and Ukraine is on the wrong side.95

Recognizing Ukraine’s fear of falling in between NATO and Russia, NATO signed a “Charter on a Distinctive Partnership” with Ukraine at the July 1997 Madrid summit that offered membership to Poland, the Czech Republic, and Hungary.96 The Charter signaled that Ukraine was considered to be an important partner, and that NATO was taking a stake in its future and its security. Rather than the firm security guarantee 92 Pifer, The Eagle and the Trident, pp. 94‒95.

93 Mikhail Tretyakov, “So Stratigicheskim Sotrudnichestvom Pridetsya Podolzhdat’,”

Pravda, March 24, 1994, p. 3.

94 Roman Wolczuk, “Polish-Ukrainian Relations: A Strategic Partnership Conditioned by Externalities,” in David H. Dunn and Marcin Zaborowski, eds., Poland: A New Power in Transatlantic Security (London: Frank Cass, 2003), p. 146.

95 Elizabeth Pond, “Poland and Ukraine Learn to Be Friends,” Wall Street Journal, Europe, June 26, 1996, p. 8.

96 The text of the Ukraine-NATO Charter can be viewed at www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/

official_texts_25457.htm. On the legacy of the Charter, see James Greene, “NATO-Ukraine Distinctive Partnership Turns Twenty: Lessons to Take Forward,” NATO

Review, April 2017.

Ukraine and NATO

91

Ukraine sought, the document referred back to the assurances concerning its territorial integrity made when Ukraine acceded to the NPT and contained in the Budapest Memorandum.

Russia did not formally object to the Charter. When the Russian and Ukrainian foreign ministers met in Kyiv in May 1998, and Borys Tarasiuk said “Our policy of integration into European and North Atlantic structures remains unchanged,” Primakov commented simply:

“They’re not talking about Ukraine’s accession to NATO; I suppose so.”97

In practice, PfP led to less substantive change than its symbolic importance implied. NATO official James Greene later wrote: Ukraine’s formal institutions have frequently proven a weak vessel for carrying forward the knowledge and know-how gained from work with the Alliance.

Ukrainian units would train to PfP standards, but their core manuals would remain unchanged. A unit would be put together for deployment to an operation, only to have its members sent back to home units on their return.

Officers would go for training abroad, only to find their new-found experience was valued more by civilian think tanks than the Armed Forces.98

The relationships between the United States and Ukraine were regarded as having helped keep the army from intervening during the Orange Revolution in 2004, but the absence of genuine military reform was to be exposed badly in 2014.

In February 1994, Vitaly Portnikov argued in Nezavisimaya Gazeta that it was understandable that the central European states would move from NATO’s “waiting room” into the organization itself. But by putting Ukraine in the same waiting room, Portnikov argued, NATO was beg-ging the question: if the Czech Republic and Poland could join, and perhaps even Russia, “Why not Ukraine?” But if Ukraine were offered membership,

then Western politicians will have to listen to quite a few bitter words and reproaches from their Russian partners. So, on closer scrutiny, the “waiting-room effect” invented by US President Bill Clinton is an even more dangerous thing than immediate admission to the guest room. It would be interesting to know, how would they react in the West if Moscow joined the Partnership? Then what would come of all the crafty geopolitics of the American administration?

And how will they explain in Washington why Prague was being kept in the 97 Sergey Il’chenko, “Rossiya-NATO-Ukrayina: Kuchma Shantazhiruyet Moskvu,”

Pravda-5, May 30, 1998. Il’chenko opined that Kuchma was blackmailing the Russian leadership: that unless he received much more economic aid, Ukraine would join NATO

and there would be “NATO tanks on the borders of Smolensk region.”

98 Greene, “NATO-Ukraine.”

92

Hope and Hardship, 1994–1999

waiting room for a short time and Kiev for a little longer, while Moscow waits in the fresh air on the porch?99

While Russia did join the PfP, it was noticeably less eager than Ukraine, and it remained deeply concerned about NATO expansion.100

Alexei Pushkov lamented what he viewed as the irony that NATO

enlargement was occurring not because Russia was a threat, but because it was so unthreatening. He cited an anonymous western diplomat as saying that had Zhironovsky been president rather that Yeltsin, western policy would have been much more restrained.

The fact that Moscow agreed to these steps without the physical coercion that was applied to Germany and Japan in their time is fundamental. This gave us every reason to expect the West to meet us halfway. However, that movement proved to be very limited. After a brief honeymoon, … the West’s intentions began to die.

First we learned that the West wanted to provide money but did not have it, so to speak … Then we found out that it was in the US’s interests to encourage centrifugal tendencies in the post-Soviet space (Zbigniew Brzezinski, with his characteristic elegance, called this line support for “geopolitical pluralism” in the former USSR). Finally, the West reached the conclusion that the countries of Eastern Europe should be admitted to NATO, just to be on the safe side, instead of pursuing some path of some abstract system of European security.101

In 1997, just before the Madrid summit invited the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland to join NATO, NATO and Russia signed the

“NATO-Russia Founding Act,” which was intended to reassure Russia that expansion would not harm its interests. Russia was further compensated by being invited to join the G-7 group of leading economies. While some in Russia were indeed reassured by these measures, and while Yeltsin sought to make the best of the situation, opinion in Russia was overwhelmingly negative.

Some western analysts opposed expansion for the same reasons Russia did, and some anticipated the problems it would cause for Ukraine. Once the process began, a new dividing line would be drawn in Europe, and those on the “wrong” side of it would push for inclusion. The process of eastward enlargement of NATO would eventually reach Ukraine, but

“[t]aking in Ukraine without also inducting Russia is the quickest way to alienate Russia, because Russians across the political spectrum consider 99 Vitaly Portnikov, “Partnerstvo Radi Ukrainy: Vpustyat li Kiev v evropeiskuyu gostinuyu?” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, February 12, 1994, p. 1.

100 For a detailed analysis of Russia’s perspective on NATO expansion, see J. L. Black, Russia Faces NATO Expansion: Bearing Gifts or Bearing Arms (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2000).

101 Alexei Pushkov, “Vneshnyaya Politika Rossii,” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, November 16, 1995, pp. 1, 5.

Ukraine and the European Union

93

Ukraine to be part of Russia.”102 Stephen Walt later argued that focusing on the Partnership for Peace, which “included many of the same benefits of NATO expansion … but also included Russia,” would have worked better.103 What security problems might have arisen had NATO not enlarged, or whether any of these alternative strategies might have yielded better outcomes, is a matter of speculation, but there can be no doubt that the enlargement of NATO irritated Russia and made people wonder where, in relation to Ukraine, it might end.

Ukraine and the European Union

Kuchma’s turn to the West included the European Union, which was less controversial within Ukraine and less threatening to Russia. In the summer of 1994, the European Union and Ukraine signed a “Partnership and Cooperation Agreement” (PCA). The timing of the signing of the PCA could not have been more important, for it coincided with a surge, especially in eastern Ukraine, in favor of joining the CIS Customs Union. The signing of the PCA, at least symbolically, showed that there was another alternative to reintegration with Russia. Ukraine’s deputy foreign minister, Oleksandr Makarenko, made it clear that the EU, not the CIS, was where Ukraine intended to head: “The very fact that the agreement was signed in the form that it was and that we were able to do that answers the question: Where, in the final analysis, should Ukraine be moving ‒ to the East, back to the past, or to the West, toward the future?”104

At a meeting with his foreign affairs team in July, Kuchma carefully distinguished between integration with western Europe and cooperation with the CIS:

Along with the strategic choice of adhering to the process of European integration, Ukraine’s firm and consistent line is the line of maximum broadening and deepening of bilateral and multilateral forms of cooperation both within and outside the framework of the CIS while safeguarding the principles of mutual benefit and respect for each other’s interests and abiding by the generally recognized norms of international law.105

102 Robert J. Art, “Creating a Disaster: NATO’s Open Door Policy,” Political Science Quarterly 113, 3 (1998): 383‒384. Art (pp. 399ff ) recommended a new “concert of Europe” as an alternative to NATO expansion.

103 Stephen M. Walt, “NATO Owes Putin a Big Thank-You,” ForeignPolicy.com, September 4, 2014.

104 Quoted in Roman Solchanyk, Ukraine and Russia: The Post-Soviet Transition (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2001), p. 92.

105 Quoted in ibid., pp. 92‒93.

94

Hope and Hardship, 1994–1999

Over time, Kuchma strengthened this European rhetoric. Speaking in Helsinki in 1996, he deployed a civilizational argument:

One of the most important tasks on our agenda in the sphere of foreign policy is to overcome the artificial isolation of Ukraine from Europe, which for centuries deprived the Ukrainian people from, as our poet said, “the feeling of a single family,” which is necessary today to all of us Europeans. The cradle of European culture is the European Christian civilization.106

This was a very different reading of history and culture than the Russian version, which saw Ukraine as fundamentally Russian.

The signing of the PCA was followed by the establishment of a range of bilateral EU-Ukraine bodies, including the EU-Ukraine Cooperation Council. In 1998 Ukraine adopted an official strategy on EU integration and created a National Agency for Development of European Integration. However, the PCA had to be ratified by EU member state parliaments, and this dragged on, demonstrating the lack of enthusiasm around the European Union for integration with Ukraine. To deal with that delay, the two sides reached an “Interim Agreement” in 1995 to move forward with those parts of the PCA which were not subject to ratification.

As with NATO, Ukraine feared being left on the outside of an enlarged European Union, and as with NATO, the main concern was with Poland. Poland was a vital trade partner as well as a source of remittances from Ukrainian workers there. Polish membership in the European Union would heighten trade barriers between Ukraine and Poland and redirect Poland’s economy toward the EU, reducing Ukraine’s access to the Polish market and inhibiting the cross-border shuttle trade on which many Ukrainians relied.

Even as Kuchma was seeking greater political support from Russia, and making limited economic concessions, Ukraine was trying to build an alliance of non-Russian states in the region. In 1997, the leaders of Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan, and Moldova formed a group (known as GUAM; Uzbekistan joined in 1999) to find an energy transportation corridor from the Caspian basin to Europe, bypassing Russia. The original four participants also shared experience with separatist movements being supported by Russia. Azerbaijan and Uzbekistan were major energy producers but were hampered by Russian control of the pipelines that took their products to market. Georgia, Ukraine, and Moldova were 106 Leonid Kuchma, “Ukrayina i Maibutnye Yevropy,” February 8, 1996, reprinted in Leonid Kuchma, Kroky Stanovlennya Natsional’noyi Ekonomiky 1994‒2004 Roky, Knyha Persha, Podolannya Kryzy Radykal’ni Ekonomichni Reformy 1994‒1999 (Kyiv: Lybid’, 2008), p. 196.

Ukraine and the European Union

95

consumers that sought to diversify their supply away from Russia to the other Caspian suppliers. Georgia and Ukraine were also transport corridors, and so potentially provided part of the solution for Azerbaijan and Uzbekistan. While the organization was more form than substance, the United States sought to reinvigorate it after 2001. Combined with the establishment of basing and overflight agreements to support the war in Afghanistan, Russia increasingly had the perception that the United States was supplanting its role in Central Asia.107 Even if Russia supported the overthrow of the Taliban government in Afghanistan, it did not want to sanction a long-term US presence along its southern flank.

There were insufficient interests to keep the group going, and it withered after 2001.

The appointment in 1998 of the strongly pro-European Borys Tarasiuk, who had previously been ambassador both to the Benelux countries and to NATO, as foreign minister was a further sign of Kuchma’s commitment to the European vector in Ukrainian foreign policy. Tarasiuk stated that the “European idea has become Ukraine’s national idea.”108 In June 1998, he approved “Ukraine’s Strategy of Integration into the European Union.”109 That Tarasiuk, who was returned to the post of foreign minister by President Yushchenko after the Orange Revolution, was appointed to the same position by Kuchma, is some measure of how ardently pro-European Ukrainian policy was at this time.

Kuchma’s turn to the West was strengthened by his 1999 reelection campaign. As Yeltsin had in 1996, Kuchma ran as the alternative to a return to communism. He positioned himself as the candidate of European integration, saying: “We should move further to the West and become full members of the European community.”110 Western Ukraine, which had voted heavily against Kuchma in 1994, now voted heavily for him. The campaign was notable for charges of manipulation based on tactics that Andrew Wilson called “virtual politics,” which have since come to seem commonplace.111

Much of this emphasis on the EU, however, was insincere. European integration was as much about transformation of the government and legal system as about the agreements that were signed, and by this 107 Lynch, Misperceptions and Divergences, pp. 10‒11.

108 Solchanyk, Ukraine and Russia, p. 94.

109 Ibid., p. 93.

110 Mikhail Melnik, “Kuchma Confident and Hopes to Win in First Round ‒ Ukraine,”

Itar-Tass Weekly News, October 29, 1999.

111 Andrew Wilson, Virtual Politics: Faking Democracy in the Post-Soviet World (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2005).

96

Hope and Hardship, 1994–1999

measure (as with NATO) Ukraine made very little progress.112 Ukraine’s

“strategy” of European integration obscured a deep contradiction in goals. While Kuchma and other Ukrainian leaders sought the geopolitical and national identity benefits of “integration” and the economic benefits of access to the EU market, they rejected what went with it ‒ rule of law, economic reform, reduction of corruption, and strengthening of democracy. Ukraine continued to enact new nontariff barriers to trade, in direct contradiction of the PCA commitment to reduce them. Over time, Ukraine’s credibility with EU technocrats diminished.

Like many other governments, Ukraine was torn between the desire to pursue integration and the intense domestic pressure to protect existing jobs. The situation was particularly frustrating for Ukraine because the sectors in which it was most competitive internationally ‒

agriculture and steel ‒ were those that were most subject to protection-ism, such as the EU’s Common Agriculture Policy and World Trade Organization (WTO) antidumping rules. While Ukraine received an IMF Standby Program in August 1997, the December tranche of that was not disbursed due to Ukraine’s failure to meet IMF

requirements.113 Measured by aid, the relationship was also relatively modest. Roman Wolczuk estimates that total EU aid in the years 1996‒

1999 totaled ECU 538 million (or $608 million at 1997 exchange rates).114

In this sense, there was a parallel between Ukraine’s policy toward EU

integration and that toward CIS integration. In both cases, the Ukrainian leadership sought narrow economic and political benefits while resisting the two different kinds of political changes being demanded: internal reform (by the EU) and acceptance of Russian leadership (by Russia).

While the European Union responded to Ukraine by losing interest and shifting its attention to other problems, Russia persisted in seeking ways to get Ukraine to change its position.

The 1998 economic crisis in Ukraine further undermined integration with the European Union. The Asian financial crisis that began in Thailand in mid-1997 spread to Russia and Ukraine in early 1998.

Ukraine’s economic output fell again, just as it seemed the economy might finally turn the corner on its post-Soviet contraction, and its ability to make loan payments was endangered. At least rhetorically, Kuchma 112 See Paul J. Kubicek, “The European Union and Ukraine: Real Partners or Relationship of Convenience?” in Paul J. Kubicek, ed., The European Union and Democratization (London: Routledge, 2004), pp. 150‒173.

113 Ukrainian Weekly, December 27, 1998, No. 52, Vol. LXVI.

114 Wolczuk, Ukraine’s Foreign and Security Policy, p. 112.

Kosovo Deepens Russia’s Conflict with the West 97

recognized the danger that Ukraine’s economy still posed to its independence:

First among these [priorities] is state strength and national security … I hope that future

generations

will

evaluate

with

understanding

our

mistakes

and

miscalculation, our difficulties and unresolved problems that we could not overcome. But they will never forgive us if we, in determining the plans for future economic development, undermine the fundamentals of the national security and sovereignty of the state, endangering Ukraine’s independence.115

In practice, however, rent-seeking continued to block reform.

For Russia, the crisis had even worse consequences. Because Russia had reformed faster than Ukraine, it had more to lose. GDP had grown in 1997 for the first time since before the Soviet collapse and inflation had finally been brought under control. Foreign capital was flowing in.

But the system was fragile, and the crisis in Asia spurred a withdrawal of capital from Russia. The ruble crashed in value, the state defaulted on domestic bond payments, and the macroeconomic stabilization policy was abandoned under pressure.116 Much of the resentment generated by the collapse was directed at the West, which had advocated the financial policies that many held responsible for the mess.117 Andrei Illarionov wrote afterwards that

The most serious ideological consequence of the crisis was a powerful shift in public opinion. The words “democracy,” “reforms,” and “liberal” and the concepts and the people associated with them have been discredited … The Russian population at large has become much more receptive to vigorous government intervention in economic and social life, theories of a Western conspiracy against Russia, and the idea of a unique “Russian way” … One can hardly avoid the painful conclusion that the repeated attempts to create a stable democratic society with an effective market economy in Russia have failed.118

Kosovo Deepens Russia’s Conflict with the West

NATO’s decision to bomb Serbia in March 1999 could not have come at a worse time, just a few weeks after the ceremony in which the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland officially became NATO members.

115 “Zmishchnennya derzhavnosti ta Natsional’noyi Bezpeky ‒ Osnova Ekonomichnoyi Stratehiyi,” March 3, 1999, in Kuchma, Kroky Stanovlennya, p. 396.

116 See Andrey Vavilov, The Russian Public Debt and Financial Meltdowns (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010), chapter 5.

117 Whether the West was really to blame remains hotly debated. Some blame the West’s advice, others blame the fact that it wasn’t applied more fully, especially in fiscal policies.

118 Andrei Illarionov, “The Roots of the Economic Crisis,” Journal of Democracy 10 (Spring 1999): 68‒69.

98

Hope and Hardship, 1994–1999

Conflict between Kosovar insurgents and the Yugoslavian government escalated in early 1999, leading to fears of further ethnic cleansing in the region. After Yugoslavia rejected a plan to introduce international peacekeepers to the territory, NATO leaders decided that force was needed to stop Yugoslavia from committing further violence in Kosovo. Speaking in May 1999, US President Clinton referred to “at least 100,000 missing; many young men led away in front of their families; over 500 cities, towns and villages torched.” “With just seven months left in the 20th century, Kosovo is a crucial test. Can we strengthen a global community grounded in cooperation and tolerance, rooted in common humanity, or will repression and brutality, rooted in ethnic, racial and religious hatreds dominate the agenda for the new century and the new millennium?”119

In both Russia and Ukraine, elites were outraged by the attacks. The difference was that while in Russia the outrage reinforced anger toward NATO, in Ukraine it cut across the grain of a perception of an increasingly fruitful relationship. Ukrainian opposition to NATO bombing cut across the political spectrum for several reasons.120 Most supported the principle that force could not be used without the approval of the UN

Security Council, and most tended to agree that NATO was interfering with Yugoslavia’s sovereignty. There were also worries about the precedent potentially set for Russia to intervene in the region. The leftist leadership of the parliament brought forth a motion calling for Ukraine to suspend cooperation with NATO due to the “aggressive” attacks on Yugoslavia, but received only 191 votes (of 226 required for passage).121

Without endorsing NATO’s action, Kuchma argued that Ukraine benefited from its relationship with NATO, and reassured NATO that Ukraine’s “European choice” remained in place.

In Russia, there was outrage not only at NATO, but at the Russian government (and particularly Viktor Chernomyrdin) for persuading Milosevic to acquiesce to NATO’s demands to end the bombing. Sovietskaya Rossiya published a long article by political party leaders Gennady Zyuganov (Communist), Nikolai Ryzhkov (Narodovlastie Party), and Nikolai Kharitonov (Agrarian Party), asserting that “The facts show that Mr. V. Chernomyrdin, the Russian President’s special envoy for a settlement in Yugoslavia, has played a sinister role in compelling Yugoslavia to accept NATO’s ultimatum.” They complained that Chernomyrdin’s 119 Bill Clinton, “Transcript: Clinton Justifies U.S. Involvement in Kosovo,” CNN, May 13, 1999.

120 “Die Ukraine im Labilen Gleichgewicht; Einsicht folgt hysterischen Reaktionen auf Kosovo-Konflikt,” Neue Zuercher Zeitung, May 5, 1999.

121 “Ukraine’s Parliament Fails to Approve Anti-NATO Measures,” Associated Press, April 6, 1999.

Kosovo Deepens Russia’s Conflict with the West 99

involvement circumvented the influence of the Foreign and Defense ministries, which were charged with defending Russia’s national interests. Viewing Yugoslavia as a “fraternal” country that had shown “heroic resistance,” they went on to say:

The events in Yugoslavia constitute the first attempt since World War II to redraw European borders by force. Russia’s firm initial stance gave the world community hope that the aggression would be decisively rebuffed. The damage that the ultimatum imposed on Yugoslavia has done to Russia’s international reputation is incalculable … This shameful agreement is identical to the Munich compact that paved the way for the Second World War. Appeasement of the aggressor will undoubtedly spur it to launch other wars of conquest. There is no doubt that the next target of NATO aggression will be Russia.122

This rhetoric indicates the extent to which many leading Russians now felt that the United States and Russia were full-blown adversaries.

They also stressed that the UN Security Council should play the

“decisive” role in settling the conflict and governing peacekeepers in the region. This, they concluded, would protect Russia’s national interests.

At the same time, however, the episode also demonstrated what happened when Russia and the West collaborated. While Russia was bitterly opposed to the bombing, it also played a major role in stopping it. After weeks of bombing, with Serbia holding out, and NATO planning for a ground invasion that no one wanted, Boris Yeltsin sent Viktor Chernomyrdin to Belgrade to persuade Milosevic to acquiesce to NATO’s demands, warning that Russia would not support him if he did not. This move was the key to ending the military conflict.

The Kosovo episode is one of the bridges between the 1990s and the 2000s. While the conflict in Yugoslavia had bedeviled Russia’s relations with the West since the early 1990s, by the time the bombing ceased in 1999, Russia had yet another prime minister, Vladimir Putin. In June, as the crisis was finally being resolved, Strobe Talbott met with Putin in Moscow, and reported US concern that Russian troops had been spotted moving toward Kosovo. Putin reassured him that no such movement would take place without prior consultation, and said he had not even heard of the general whom the United States had identified as leading the force. As Talbott flew back to Washington, the movement of Russian 122 G. A. Zyuganov, N. I. Ryzhkov, and N. M. Kharitonov, “Usherb Neismernim Zayavlenie ob Ocherednom Predatl’stvye Interesov Mezhdunarodnoi Bezopasnosti,”

Sovetskaya Rossiya, June 10, 1999, p. 1.

100

Hope and Hardship, 1994–1999

troops into Kosovo was confirmed.123 Thus, one of the first interactions of Putin as prime minister with the US government was seen as an act of deception. As for Kosovo, the West’s later support for its full independence was again to outrage Russia, and was invoked by Putin in 2014 as a precedent for Russia’s seizure of Crimea.

Looking back from 2016, one of Russia’s leading spokespeople on foreign policy issues, Fyodor Lukyanov, wrote that

From the Russian point of view, a critical turning point came when NATO

intervened in the Kosovo war in 1999. Many Russians ‒ even strong advocates of liberal reform ‒ were appalled by NATO’s bombing raids against Serbia, a European country with close ties to Moscow … [I]t is not only NATO’s expansion that has alarmed Russia, but its transformation … [I]t is now a fighting group, which it was not during the cold war.124

The restarting of war in Chechnya further divided the West from Russia. Russia sought to reestablish control of the territory after militants based there had attacked Dagestan, among other acts of insurgency and terrorism within Russia. The level of violence that Russia used in prosecuting the war aroused severe criticism in the West, and that criticism was seen in Russia as hostile.

Conclusion

Relations among Ukraine, Russia, and the West evolved significantly between 1994 and 1999, but many core differences endured. In 1994, Ukraine began emerging from the isolation that the United States had imposed while Ukraine hesitated over its nuclear weapons. By the end, Ukraine was increasingly carving out for itself a role in the region. There were several gains in Ukraine-Russia-United States-Europe relations in the period, most importantly the signing of the Friendship Treaty. Moreover, none of the biggest dangers had come to pass. NATO expansion, while deeply opposed by Russia, had been achieved in the context of the NATO-Russia Founding Act and NATO-Ukraine Charter, which

helped to reassure everyone.

At the same time, few of the dangers to Ukraine had been removed, and many of its internal problems were unresolved. While Russia had signed a treaty promising to respect Ukraine’s independence, many of its actions and other statements called that commitment into question.

123 The episode is related in Strobe Talbott, The Russia Hand: A Memoir of Presidential Diplomacy (New York: Random House 2002), p. 336.

124 Fyodor Lukyanov, “Putin’s Foreign Policy: The Quest to Restore Russia’s Rightful Place,” Foreign Affairs 95, 3 (May/June 2016): 32‒33.

Conclusion

101

Leading politicians repeatedly made claims on Crimea, economic coercion went on, and Russian policy continued to assume that reintegration of the region under Russian hegemony was both necessary and inevitable.

Moreover, Ukraine’s domestic politics had evolved in ways that facilitated future Russian influence. The state remained weak and captured by interest groups. Regional and institutional divisions undermined efforts at building a strong working majority in the parliament. As a result, Leonid Kuchma aggrandized executive power at the expense of parliament, such that Ukraine’s politics began to resemble the superpresidentialism of Russia. The Ukrainian government was increasingly captured by a swarm of competing oligarchic groups engaged in rent-seeking opportunities, the most important of which was energy, which was closely connected to Russia.

Relations between Russia and the West deteriorated, and while this appeared to benefit Ukraine in the short term, it would eventually be caught in the gap that was emerging. The sources of increasing tension between Russia and the West were many: Yugoslavia, Chechnya, NATO

expansion, revanchism in Russia, economic crisis, energy politics, and more. Underlying all of them was a basic contradiction between Russia’s vision of itself as a traditional great power and Europe’s efforts to move beyond traditional great power politics.

These problems tended to complicate one another, often at what seemed the worst possible moment. As highlighted at the outset of the chapter, 1994 began positively for the West, Russia, and Ukraine, as the agreement on denuclearization was coupled with aid to Ukraine and commitments to respect its borders. But that positive development came just a month after Russia’s 1993 parliamentary elections shook everyone’s confidence in Russian reform and its commitment to friendly relations with Ukraine and the West. Yet just as the denuclearization deal was being signed, Clinton announced that NATO would expand.

Then the next month the Ames scandal sent the US Congress into a fury, and Serbian shelling of the Sarajevo marketplace put Russia and NATO

on opposite side of the biggest conflict of the new post-Cold War era.

Much the same thing happened toward the end of the period: the consummation of NATO expansion, in the works for five years, just as the alliance was bombing Serbia, strengthened Russia’s worst beliefs about what NATO expansion meant. The brutal reescalation of the war in Chechnya shortly thereafter confirmed the West’s worst fears about Russia.

In a book published in 1994, Raymond Garthoff, one of the great scholars of United States-Soviet relations, wrote: “Russia must recognize its international responsibilities and the appropriate constraints on pursuit of its interests. The United States, for its part, needs to be more understanding of Russian pursuit of its national interests.”125 By the time Garthoff wrote these reasonable lines, it was already becoming very difficult for either side to heed his advice. The security dilemma and incompatible understandings of the status quo interacted corrosively.

Russians saw each US or NATO move as an offense requiring a response, while the United States and NATO saw each Russian move that complicated Yugoslavia or worried Ukraine, and each sign that conservatives were gaining ground in Russia, as a reason to hedge their bets.

By 1999 the increasingly erratic Boris Yeltsin was ceding power to the young, vigorous, and pragmatic Vladimir Putin. Bill Clinton would be leaving power in another year. Ukraine’s Kuchma, freshly reelected, promised further stability. The 1990s had been a period of unthinkable transformation that would be remembered very differently in different places. For the West it was a time of triumph between the Cold War and the wars of the post-9/11 era. For Ukraine it was an era of national independence, painful but celebrated. For Russia it was an era of almost unmitigated disaster, as the fall of communism was overshadowed by the collapse of Russia’s economy and its international position.


