On November 30, 1999, Leonid Kuchma was inaugurated for his second term as Ukraine’s president. Speaking in the Palace “Ukrayina,”

Kuchma laid out his program. He stated that Ukraine’s independence was inviolable, and went on first to assert that Russia was Ukraine’s most important partner, and then that Ukraine would seek to strengthen its relationships with NATO and the United States and to pursue EU

membership.1 In December, following a trip to the United States, Kuchma nominated Viktor Yushchenko to be Ukraine’s prime minister.

Yushchenko’s selection was seen as having been influenced by a meeting Kuchma had with Vice President Al Gore, as well as by pressure from the IMF amid the need to restructure debts.2 Yushchenko’s appointment conveyed that Ukraine was serious about economic reform, about remaining democratic, and about its ties with the West.

Kuchma’s “multivector” foreign policy was highly pragmatic. Ukraine could not turn its back on Russia, but did not trust it, and longed for closer relations with Europe. Yushchenko’s economic reforms furthered the European “vector,” but Kuchma’s consolidation of power undermined it. This consolidation, epitomized by the murder of the journalist Georgiy Gongadze, put in motion the chain of events that led to the Orange Revolution in 2004. By the end of 2000, Ukraine’s relationship with the West was deteriorating, and relations with Russia were improving.

The period from Kuchma’s reelection as president in Ukraine and Putin’s appointment as acting president in Russia to the Orange Revolution was a pivotal one in relations between Ukraine, Russia, and the 1 Yanina Sokolovskaya, “Leonid Kuchma Delivers ‘Coronation Speech’ Intended to Please Everyone,” Izvestia, December 1, 1999, p. 3, in The Current Digest of the Russian Press, No. 48, Vol. 51, December 29, 1999, p. 22.

2 Gennady Sysoyev, “Premier Turns Ukraine to West,” Kommersant, December 12, 1999, p. 3, in Russian Press Digest, December 23, 1999; Hans Van Zon, “Political Culture and Neo-Patrimonialism under Leonid Kuchma,” Problems of Post-Communism 52, 5 (2005): 12‒22.

103

104

Autocracy and Revolution, 1999–2004

West. Three important developments characterized this period. First, the connection between geopolitics and democratization came to the fore, in the impact of Kuchma’s consolidation of power on relations with the West and Russia, and the similar impact of Putin’s elimination of opposition on Russia’s relations with the West, and then more definitively in the Orange Revolution. Second, the US war in Iraq steeled Russian determination to push back against US hegemony and confirmed the United States’ focus on democracy promotion. Third, the Orange Revolution brought together two issues that had been linked only loosely: Ukraine’s bid for independence from Russia and Russia’s disagreement with the West. After 2004, there was no doubt that there was a competition between Russia and the West over Ukraine.

Kuchma’s Consolidation and the Foreign Policy Effects

The 1999 election helped Leonid Kuchma to continue consolidating his power. Building from his ability to control access to rent-seeking opportunities, Kuchma increasingly used selective prosecution to punish potential challengers.3 This included putting increasing pressure on independent media. In many respects, Kuchma was pursuing similar policies to those of Putin in Russia, signaling to oligarchs that they could keep their ill-gotten gains only if they supported him. For various reasons, not least of which was that his power was not rooted in the KGB, Kuchma eventually failed where Putin succeeded. Kuchma’s political popularity plummeted, and his support shifted from western Ukraine back toward the east. Moreover, he struggled to control the oligarchs. The pro-presidential oligarchs became more powerful, and those from the Donbas, represented by the Party of Regions, became more influential.

The pressure on the independent media was symbolized by the murder of Gongadze. Gongadze was a journalist on a relatively obscure website, Ukrayinska Pravda, which relentlessly exposed the misdeeds of the government. He got under Kuchma’s skin, and Kuchma told Minister of Internal Affairs Yuriy Kravchenko to “drive him out, throw [him] out.

Give him to the Chechens.”4 In September 2000, Gongadze disappeared, and in November his decapitated body was found near Kyiv.

3 See Keith Darden, “The Integrity of Corrupt States: Graft as an Informal State Institution,” Politics and Society 36, 1 (March 2008): 35‒60.

4 This and several other incriminating excerpts regarding Gongadze are translated in RFE/

RL, “Transcript: What Do Melnychenko’s Tapes Say about Gongadze Case,” March 3, 2005, www.rferl.org/a/1057789.html.

Kuchma’s Consolidation and the Foreign Policy 105

It was later determined that he had been murdered by a team of officers from the Interior Ministry. Exactly who ordered his murder and why remains debated, but his disappearance was viewed as an assault on the media, and the grisly remains of his body were seen as a particularly aggressive warning to others.

The Gongadze case also showed the ability of Kuchma’s opponents among the elite to push back. On November 28, 2000, Oleksandr Moroz, leader of the Socialist Party of Ukraine and Speaker of the parliament, played excerpts of recordings in which Kuchma discussed his desire to get rid of Gongadze. The recordings had apparently been made by a member of Kuchma’s security detail, Major Mykola Melnychenko. There has been widespread speculation about who might have been behind the recordings, but the truth remains unclear.

The revelations kicked off the “Ukraine without Kuchma” movement, which was in many respects a precursor to the Orange Revolution.5

Moroz and Yuliya Tymoshenko joined forces in a “National Salvation Committee.” A series of street protests was held, and in February 2001 Moroz predicted that by June “we will have enough support either for the president’s impeachment, a referendum on no-confidence, or he will be simply forced to resign.”6 Instead, the opposition split and the security forces backed Kuchma. Ukraine’s most popular politician, Viktor Yushchenko, remained loyal to Kuchma, co-signing with him a letter criticizing the National Salvation Committee. Yuliya Tymoshenko was arrested on smuggling charges (later dropped) that were widely seen as politically motivated. Kyiv Mayor Oleksandr Omelchenko scheduled a construction project on the Maidan, and when the opposition scheduled a large protest in April 2001, authorities obstructed transportation access to Kyiv, depressing turnout.7

With his popularity flagging, Kuchma had to search for allies. The 2002 parliamentary election made the Party of Regions the key to Kuchma’s coalition. While Kuchma was increasingly powerful, he was unable to build either a commanding pro-presidential party like Putin’s United Russia or to forge a reliable pro-presidential coalition out of other parties (as Putin had secured the cooperation of the LDP and the Communist Party). Instead, he relied heavily on the Party of Regions. Donetsk oblast was the only region in which Kuchma’s party, Za Yedinu Ukrainu 5 The two protests are compared in Paul D’Anieri, “Explaining the Success and Failure of Post-Communist Revolutions,” Communist and Post-Communist Studies 39, 3 (2006): 331‒350.

6 Agence France Presse, February 27, 2001.

7 D’Anieri, “Explaining the Success and Failure,” p. 343.

106

Autocracy and Revolution, 1999–2004

(ZYU),8 finished first in the proportional representation vote. More important, the Donbas provided many of the deputies elected in the single-member districts, where ZYU did much better (winning 86 of 225 seats). The election was in many respects a defeat for Kuchma, but by combining the members elected under his party and the Party of Regions with independents that he would threaten or bribe to join him, he still managed to control the parliament. Yet there was a shift in power from the Dnipropetrovsk clan led by Kuchma to the Donetsk clan led by Yanukovych, whom Kuchma named prime minister.

The rise of the Donetsk clan and its political arm, the Party of Regions, was among the most important developments during Kuchma’s second term, reshaping the oligarchic balance of power in Ukraine and the political base of support for pro-Russian policies. In the 1990s, the Kyiv and Dnipropetrovsk clans were predominant, while Donetsk was still being contested. Donetsk was Ukraine’s most populous region; its leading oligarch, Rinat Akhmetov, emerged as Ukraine’s wealthiest man, and in the Party of Regions it built a party more adept than any other in the country at converting patronage into votes and party discipline. This combination made its rise irresistible. The rise of the Party of Regions helps explain why Yanukovych, rather than someone more polished, more popular, or more mainstream was chosen to be Kuchma’s successor in the 2004 presidential elections.

The emergence of the Party of Regions also represented a major shift in the domestic coalition supporting better relations with Russia. In the 1990s, the pro-Russian contingent was led by the communist and socialist parties, which had significant support in parliament but never in the executive branch. The Party of Regions supported good relations with Russia based on oligarchic economic interests, rather than ideology or nostalgia. Kuchma’s reliance on the Party of Regions and its oligarchs helped pro-Russian forces forge a powerful foothold in the executive branch.9

Equally important, the rise of the Party of Regions, and especially the transition from Yushchenko to Anatoliy Kinakh and then Yanukovych as prime minister completely changed the regional balance in Kuchma’s government, leaving western Ukraine alienated. “The rise of the Donetsk clan upset the delicate balance between western and eastern Ukraine.”10

8 “Za Yedinu Ukrainu” means “For a United Ukraine” and echoes the title of the pro-government “United Russia” party in Russia. In Ukraine, many called the party by the nickname “Za Yedy,” which in Russian means “for food,” referring to the inducements that presumably motivated many of the party’s voters.

9 I am grateful to Serhiy Kudelia for this point.

10 Van Zon, “Political Culture and Neo-Patrimonialism,” p. 15.

Deteriorating Ties with the West

107

As Kuchma’s consolidation of power crested and then ebbed, so did his ability to control Ukraine’s various oligarchic clans. Meanwhile, in Russia, Putin was much more successful in bringing oligarchs under state control. This contributed to a new asymmetry in Russia-Ukraine relations: Russia’s state became stronger while Ukraine’s remained weak.

In Russia, Putin could resist pressure from firms, and could even make them serve his or the state’s interest. In Ukraine, Kuchma was increasingly unable to do the same. This allowed an expanded mechanism for Russian influence. The Russian government controlled Russian firms, which bought or influenced Ukrainian firms, who increasingly captured the Ukrainian state. The IMF was insisting that Ukraine become more open to foreign investment, and a privatization program made more assets available.11 At the same time, Ukrainian oligarchs had powerful incentives to prevent the kind of extensive integration that would allow Russian oligarchs and firms, backed by the power of the Russian state, to do to them what they had done to weaker actors in Ukraine.

Deteriorating Ties with the West

The question of democracy played an increasing role in Ukraine’s latitude to choose its political alignments. Kuchma’s efforts to control politics domestically undermined relations with the West, leaving him more dependent on Russia. In September 2000, Kuchma dismissed Borys Tarasiuk as foreign minister, in what was widely seen an adjustment away from the West and toward Russia.12 Then Yushchenko left the government in April 2001. While Yushchenko was praised by reformers and respected abroad, Ukraine’s leftists loathed him for his economic reforms, and during the denouement of the Ukraine without Kuchma movement, the Communist Party sponsored a no confidence vote that succeeded in ousting him as prime minister. Yushchenko’s dismissal removed the Ukrainian leader in whom the West had the most confidence and pushed Yushchenko into opposition.

Despite these moves and despite increasing efforts to solidify ties with Russia, Kuchma continued to say that integrating with the West was a top priority. In February 2002, Kuchma established a schedule for Ukraine to meet EU accession requirements by 2011, and in May 11 Rosaria Publisi, “Clashing Agendas? Economic Interests, Elite Coalitions and Prospects for Co-operation between Russia and Ukraine,” Europe-Asia Studies 55, 6 (2003): 837.

12 See James Sherr, “The Dismissal of Borys Tarasiuk,” Occasional Brief 79, Conflict Studies

Research

Centre,

October

6,

2000.

Kuchma

accused

Tarasiuk

of

“miscalculations in implementing European integration” (quoted p. 2).

108

Autocracy and Revolution, 1999–2004

2002 the National Security and Defense Council discussed the need to

“start practical implementation of the course to join NATO.”13

The United States, and the West more broadly, were trying to walk a tightrope on Kuchma, supporting his efforts to maintain Ukraine’s independence from Russia while rejecting his authoritarian inclinations. After meeting with Kuchma in Kyiv in June 2001, US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld reported that Kuchma had assured him that Ukraine would “continue on a path of western-style democracy” and would fully investigate Gongadze’s murder.14 Rumsfeld said:

We recognize that no book has been written as to exactly how a nation moves from communism to free political and free economic institutions … What I do know is that relationships need to be nurtured and tended and strengthened and they are leaning very far forward to have a relationship with NATO, with the United States, and with their neighbors and other countries.15

The relationship with the United States worsened. In the fall of 2002, just as the United States was gearing up to attack Iraq, the State Department revealed that the Melnychenko recordings showed that Kuchma had approved selling Kolchuga air defense radar systems to Iraq. The Bush administration, tightly focused on Iraq, was outraged. State Department Spokesman Richard Boucher said: “This recording’s authentication has led us to reexamine our policy towards Ukraine, in particular towards President Kuchma. We’ve initiated a temporary pause in new obligations of Freedom Support Act assistance that goes to the central government of Ukraine while we carry out this review … we’re having a pause in programs that are with the central government authorities.”16

The timing of these developments could not have been worse for Kuchma’s hope to gain a commitment that Ukraine might someday join NATO. He sought to atone by deploying, against domestic protest, a small but symbolically important force (1,650 troops) to support the US

coalition in Iraq. Ukraine’s goal of joining NATO continued to be stated in numerous documents and even parliamentary resolutions up until mid-2004.17 Nonetheless, Kuchma’s hopes that Ukraine would receive 13 Olexiy Haran and Rostyslav Pavlenko, “The Paradoxes of Kuchma’s Russian Policy,”

PONARS Policy Memo 291, September 2003, p. 1.

14 Jim Mannion, “Rumsfeld Meets Kuchma, Cites Promises on Democracy, Dead Journalist,” Agence France Presse, June 5, 2001.

15 Ibid.

16 Transcript of Press Briefing on Ukraine, Iraq and Kolchuga Radar, US State Department, September 25, 2002.

17 Several examples are provided in Marten Malek, “The ‘Western Vector’ of the Foreign and Security Policy of Ukraine,” Journal of Slavic Military Studies 22, 4 (2009): 520.

Deteriorating Ties with the West

109

a “Membership Action Plan” were left unmet. Instead, Ukraine and NATO signed an “Action Plan” in November 2002, with the crucial word “membership” left out.18 This required extensive reforms on Ukraine’s part without any commitment to future membership. For Kuchma, this was a disappointment. For both Ukraine and the West, however, the commitment to deepening ties further was seen as important to countering Russian pressure on Ukraine, and in December 2003 NATO defense ministers praised Ukraine’s progress on military reform.19

Kuchma’s relations with the West fractured further as his efforts to consolidate power progressed. Finally, in July 2004, Kuchma suddenly dropped the goal of joining NATO (and the EU), from Ukraine’s new military doctrine, which had been adopted only the previous month.

Former Foreign Minister Borys Tarasiuk speculated that the move was prompted by Kuchma’s annoyance that NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer had criticized Kuchma on democracy and free elections.20 This was implied by the title of Kuchma’s decree, “On further development of relations with NATO with account for results of the Ukraine-NATO summit on June 29, 2004.”21 The Russian Foreign Ministry released a statement in support of the revised doctrine.22 In September, Kuchma acquiesced in the dismissal of Defense Minister Yevhen Marchuk, the last remaining advocate of NATO membership in his cabinet.

Kuchma continued to claim to want strong ties with the EU, complaining that leaving Ukraine outside of the West would lead to instability. He used a visit by Pope John Paul II in June 2001 both to bolster his reputation in general and to stress Ukraine’s ambition to increase ties with the EU. “We would not like Ukraine to be a bridge between Europe and Russia ‒ I personally do not like this idea because bridges get trampled upon.”23 A week after becoming head of the CIS Council of Presidents, Kuchma created a “State Council on European and 18 James Greene, “NATO-Ukraine Distinctive Partnership Turns Twenty: Lessons to Take Forward,” NATO Review, April 7, 2017.

19 Bertil Nygren, The Rebuilding of Greater Russia: Putin’s Foreign Policy Toward the CIS

(Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge, 2008), p. 55.

20 Anna Melnichuk, “Ukrainian Official: NATO, EU Give no Timetable for Ukraine’s Accession, Prompting Changes in Defense Doctrine,” Associated Press, July 27, 2004.

21 “Leonid Kuchma Amends Ukraine’s Military Doctrine on Accession to NATO, EU,”

RIA Novosti, July 26, 2004.

22 Melnichuk, “Ukrainian Official.”

23 “Roundup: Ukraine’s Kuchma Sends Firm Offer of ‘Partnership’ with Europe,”

Deutsche Presse-Agentur, June 28, 2001.

110

Autocracy and Revolution, 1999–2004

Euro-Atlantic Integration,” and led it himself.24 The problem for Kuchma was that while his desire for closer ties with Europe was probably genuine, his desire to sideline opposition domestically was incompatible with that goal. In 2003, the parliament passed a “Law on Fundamentals of National Security in Ukraine,” supported by the Party of Regions and Yanukovych, which made joining NATO and the European Union a priority.25 However, there was no avoiding the fact that relations with the West were ebbing due to Kuchma’s increasing authoritarianism.

Kuchma’s Turn toward Russia

As the West distanced itself from Kuchma, Kuchma turned to Moscow.

From 2000 to 2002, Kuchma met with Putin eighteen times.26 In December 2000, Kuchma went to Moscow, in what was widely seen as an attempt to gain support from Russia as the West pulled back.

“Whether or not Leonid Kuchma secures Moscow’s support will determine if he will cope with the acute internal political crisis back home.”27

In February 2001, at a meeting with Putin in Dnipropetrovsk, Kuchma agreed to new ties with Russia, including linking the two countries’

power grids and cooperation in military production.28 Of the turmoil in Ukraine, Putin had said before leaving Moscow: “What is happening is a political struggle. There is nothing extraordinary about it. I think this is a feature of a normal democratic society.”29 The events that caused the West to limit support for Kuchma did not faze Putin.

While Ukraine continued to seek to cooperate with Russia but not integrate with it, Putin was renewing Russia’s focus on Ukraine. From the time Putin came to power, he emphasized the primacy of the “near abroad,” and as his confidence in forging a close relationship with the European Union faded, he put increased emphasis on integrating the post-Soviet space. Speaking to Russia’s ambassadors in 2004, he stressed the importance of “supporting, by all means, the integration processes evolving in different trans-regional associations.”30 Kuchma’s problems with the West facilitated that emphasis.

24 Haran and Pavlenko, “The Paradoxes of Kuchma’s Russian Policy,” p. 4.

25 Olexiy Haran and Maria Zolkina, “Ukraine’s Long Road to European Integration,”

PONARS Eurasia Policy Memo No. 311, February 2014, p. 2.

26 Puglisi, “Clashing Agendas?” p. 840.

27 Vremya Novostei, quoted in Russian Press Digest, December 22, 2000.

28 Ariel Cohen, “Analysis: Ukraine Scandals,” UPI, February 23, 2001.

29 Craig Nelson, “Kuchma’s Guest Fails to Notice the Stench,” Sydney Morning Herald, February 17, 2001, p. 18.

30 Quoted in Andrei Zagorski, “Russia and the Shared Neighborhood,” in Dov Lynch, ed., What Russia Sees, Chaillot Paper No. 74 (Paris: Institute for Security Studies, 2005) p. 68.

Kuchma’s Turn toward Russia

111

In May 2001, Putin appointed Viktor Chernomyrdin ambassador to Kyiv. Given Chernomyrdin’s status in Russia as a former prime minister and favorite of the derzhavniki, his appointment was seen as a sign that relations with Ukraine would be a high priority for Putin. The warming of relations was institutionalized when Putin declared 2002 the “Year of Ukraine in Russia,” and Kuchma declared 2003 the “Year of Russia in Ukraine.” Putin then offered to make Kuchma the head of the Council of CIS leaders and, despite the fact that Ukraine continued to reject full membership in the CIS, Kuchma assumed this position in early 2003.31

Putin said: “We would like to restore what was lost with the Soviet Union’s disintegration … We must steer toward integration … concerted action is the only way to survive in conditions of [global] competition.”32

To this end, Russia advanced two successive integration projects, the Eurasian Economic Community (EurAsEC) and the Common Economic Space (CES).33 The EurAsEC was modeled on the European Union and was intended to remedy the shortcomings of the Commonwealth of Independent States. It was designed to be a supranational organization, with a set of decision-making bodies mirroring those of the EU, including a judicial entity and a parliament. Its permanent executive, to be known as the Integration Committee, had voting rules that would allow Russia to effectively control it. These institutions would overcome the ability of single countries (including Ukraine) to block integration in the CIS.

Russia deployed familiar tactics to get Ukraine to join the EurAsEc.

The organization did not include energy cooperation, which allowed Russia to continue using energy to entice or coerce Ukraine into joining. But while leaving energy out of the EurAsEc maintained Russian leverage, it also eliminated Ukraine’s main incentive to join.

With Chernomyrdin, who had run Gazprom, based in Kyiv as ambassador, Russia sought to appeal directly to Ukrainian business interests to support the deal. In March 2002, Kuchma signaled his intention to join the organization, but backed off after parliament objected, and by December 2002 he rejected full membership.34 While the EurAsEc continued to exist, Ukraine never went beyond “observer status” in it.

In February 2003, Russia proposed a less stringent alternative, the 31 Haran and Pavlenko, “The Paradoxes of Kuchma’s Russian Policy,” p. 4.

32 Fred Weir, “Putin Woos Ukraine with a Russian Common Market,” Christian Science Monitor, November 18, 2004, p. 7.

33 These projects are described in detail in Rilke Dragneva-Lewers and Kataryna Wolczuk, Ukraine between the EU and Russia: The Integration Challenge (London: Palgrave MacMillan, 2015), pp. 20‒23, on which this discussion draws.

34 Haran and Pavlenko, “The Paradoxes of Kuchma’s Russian Policy,” p. 4.

112

Autocracy and Revolution, 1999–2004

Common Economic Space (CES), initially to include Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan.

Kuchma surprised many by agreeing to join the Common Economic Space, with the organization officially being founded in September 2003.35 Kuchma’s decision appears to have been motivated by domestic concerns as much as international needs. After the Gongadze scandal, the Ukraine without Kuchma movement, and the 2002 parliamentary elections, his domestic status was at a nadir, and he increasingly relied on support in eastern Ukraine, where integration with Russia was popular.

“Most of the oligarchs who wanted an independent Ukraine and good relations with the West saw this move as contrary to their interests.”36

Kuchma’s signing the agreement fitted with his long-term practice of signing integration deals (not only with Russia but also with NATO and the EU) but seeking the benefits without fulfilling the commitments.

Accordingly, Ukraine’s participation in the CES was more symbolic than real. Kuchma and Prime Minister Yanukovych were particularly focused on energy prices, with Deputy Prime Minister Nikolai Azarov telling the Rada that “If there is no single price on energy, there will not be a common economic space.”37

For much of this period, the Black Sea Fleet and Crimea largely receded as issues. While Russian politicians, most notably Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov, continued to pledge involvement in Sevastopol, state-to-state acrimony diminished. This was largely a result of the Friendship Treaty and Black Sea Fleet agreements of 1997. In July 2001, Kuchma and Putin jointly reviewed a procession of warships at Sevastopol, in what was called “an historic moment of amity.”38 In 2003, Russia announced plans to build a base at Novorossiisk, leading to speculation that it accepted the need to move the Black Sea Fleet from Sevastopol, which Russian leaders denied.39 Having agreed to honor the existing state border, the two sides needed to actually demarcate it, leading to many squabbles.40

35 Dragneva-Lewers and Wolczuk, Ukraine between the EU and Russia, p. 22. Hans Van Zon (“Political Culture and Neo-Patrimonialism,” p. 13) reports that, in keeping with the consolidation of power in the presidential administration, the decision to sign the agreement was reached in secret, without the participation of the Cabinet of Ministers, with Yanukovych then compelled to sign it.

36 Van Zon, “Political Culture and Neo-Patrimonialism,” p. 15.

37 Quoted in Dragneva-Lewers and Wolczuk, Ukraine between the EU and Russia, p. 23.

38 “Putin and Kuchma Review Black Sea Fleet together in Sevastopol,” Deutsche Presse-Agentur, July 29, 2001.

39 RIA Novosti, August 12, 2003.

40 On the demarcation issue, see Taras Kuzio, Ukraine-Crimea-Russia (Stuttgart: ibidem-Verlag, 2007), pp. 85‒93.

The EU, Ukraine, and Russia

113

Just as things seemed to be going better with Ukraine, Russia inexplic-ably poisoned the relationship by starting a border squabble in the Kerch Strait, the strip of water separating the Crimean peninsula from Russia’s Krasnodar region. In October 2003, a week after an EU-Ukraine summit in Yalta, Russia began building a dam from Russia toward an island (Tuzla) in the middle of the strait. Russia appeared to be unilaterally claiming the island, which had been regarded as part of Crimea.41

Kuchma cut short a Latin American trip to return to Ukraine and visit Tuzla, saying “The closer the causeway gets to our coast, the closer we move towards the West.”42 While the crisis was quelled by an agreement to stop construction and negotiate the border through the Kerch Strait, the crisis renewed Ukraine’s fears of Russian aggression and further undermined the likelihood that Kuchma would implement the CES

agreement in a way that Russia had hoped.

The EU, Ukraine, and Russia

Relations between the European Union, Russia and Ukraine in this period showed the dynamics of the security dilemma in the area of economic integration. The EU’s planned 2004 expansion was going to add ten new members, of which four had been part of the Warsaw Pact and three others had been part of the Soviet Union. This process, which had progressed incrementally since 1990, inadvertently but inevitably made Ukraine of much greater interest to the EU. “[N]o matter how frequently NATO and EU officials say that they do not intend to redivide Europe, and no matter how many ‘partnership’ agreements they offer to nonmembers, it is inevitable that admitting some countries to full membership of the two organisations and excluding others will produce

‘insiders’ and ‘outsiders.’”43 As a result, the EU’s plans for its eastern borderlands overlapped with Russia’s plans for its western border.44

While Russia (and others) were much more stridently opposed to NATO

expansion than to EU expansion, they had much the same effect in the 41 After 2014, the island became part of the path for the bridge that Russia built to create a land link between Russia and Crimea.

42 Izvestiya, quoted in Valerie Mason, “Ukrainian President Denounces Russian

‘Imperialism’ in Kerch Strait Row,” IHS Global Insight, October 28, 1993.

43 Margot Light, John Löwenhardt, and Stephen White, “Russia and the Dual Expansion of Europe,” ESRC “One Europe or Several?” Policy Paper 02/00, 2000.

44 This does not mean that EU expansion was a mistake. On the contrary, even with the recent “backsliding” in several of the states that joined the European Union in 2004, the process was widely regarded as having aided the causes of democracy, security, and prosperity in central Europe.

114

Autocracy and Revolution, 1999–2004

dilemmas they produced for Russia, for the “in-between” states, and for the organizations themselves. “More broadly, the historic enlargement of the European Union with the incorporation of ten new members on May 1, 2004, underscored the EU policy of constructing a Europe without any meaningful role for Russia.”45

The European Union recognized that its expansion created “new impetus to the effort of drawing closer to the 385 million inhabitants of the countries who will find themselves on the external land and sea border, namely Russia, the Western NIS and the Southern Mediterra-nean,” and stated its “determination to avoid drawing new dividing lines in Europe and to promote stability and prosperity within and beyond the new borders of the Union.”46 The result was the European Neighborhood Policy (ENP), which was designed to leverage the benefits of conditionality while making the conditions less stringent, both for the target countries and for the EU.47 While those efforts were intended to include Russia, Russia clearly perceived a need to respond, not only due to its desire to control Ukraine, Belarus, and others politically, but also due to the need to avoid being cut off from them economically. Those efforts were in turn resisted in Ukraine. Andrei Zagorski worried at the time that “in the long run, the EU may become a revisionist power from Moscow’s perspective, similar to the United States in Georgia and Ukraine.”48

While Russian leaders were worried that the ENP might undermine Russia’s goals in the region to its west, some recognized that pushing back might be counterproductive. There was also a sense that “the probability of the EU challenging the status quo in the ‘shared neighborhood’ at Russia’s expense is so remote as to be unlikely to affect policy.”49 Moreover, many thought that EU and Russian goals could be squared if Russia merged its project of integrating its region with the project of integrating that region with the European Union. This would ensure that the other states did not integrate with the European Union more quickly than with Russia and would reinforce Russia’s leadership in 45 Andrei P. Tsygankov, “Putin and Foreign Policy,” in Dale R. Herspring, ed., Putin’s Russia: Past Imperfect, Future Uncertain (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2007), p. 202.

46 Commission of the European Communities, “Wider Europe ‒ Neighbourhood: A New Framework for Relations with our Eastern and Southern Neighbours, COM(2003) 104

final, March 11, 2003, pp. 3‒4.

47 See Gwendolyn Sasse, “The European Neighbourhood Policy: Conditionality Revisited for the EU’s Eastern Neighbours,” Europe-Asia Studies 60, 2 (March 2008): 295‒316.

48 Zagorski, “Russia and the Shared Neighborhood,” p. 77.

49 Ibid., p. 75.

The EU, Ukraine, and Russia

115

its immediate region and in Europe more broadly.50 However, by the May 2003 EU-Russia summit, Russia had rejected that strategy, apparently because with Putin’s power consolidated internally and rising energy prices giving Russia more power internationally, it felt that it could pursue its plans for integration in its region in competition with the European Union rather than in partnership with it.51 Russia opposed the EU’s project in the region in part because it was premised upon the

“normative hegemony” of the European Union.52 Thus, not only did the ENP and Russia’s reaction constitute an economic security dilemma, it invoked the geopolitical consequences of democratization.

The geopolitics of democratization became as much about the EU, whose influence reached, through a series of partnerships, beyond its borders, as about NATO.53 In June 1999, the European Union had advanced a “Common Strategy of the European Union” on Russia.

The document began: “A stable, democratic and prosperous Russia, firmly anchored in a united Europe free of new dividing lines, is essential to lasting peace on the continent. The issues which the whole continent faces can be resolved only through ever closer cooperation between Russia and the European Union.”54 The document went into considerable detail on the importance of liberal norms and institutions: “The establishment of efficient, transparent public institutions is one of the prerequisites for confidence and wider adherence to democratic guide-lines and the operation of the rule of law … The emergence of civil society in all areas is indispensable for the consolidation of democracy in Russia.”55 The European Union was concerned with Russia’s behavior in Chechnya as well as the perception that Russia had not fulfilled commitments made at the 1999 Istanbul OSCE summit regarding withdrawal of its troops from Moldova and Georgia.56 As an analyst at the 50 L. Karabeshkin, “Vostochnoye izmerenie politiki ES i Rossia,” in Filip Kazin and Vladimir Kuznetzov, eds., Vostochnoye izmerenie Evropeiskogo Soyuza i Rossia.

Mezhdunarodnaya konferentsia. Sbornik dokladov. Veliky Novgorod, November 14, 2003

(St. Petersburg: BITS, 2004), pp. 34‒45, cited in Igor Gretskiy, Evgeny Treshchenkov, and Konstantin Golubev, “Russia’s Perceptions and Misperceptions of the EU Eastern Partnership,” Communist and Post-Communist Studies 47 (2014): 376.

51 Gretskiy et al., “Russia’s Perceptions and Misperceptions,” p. 376.

52 Hiski Haukkala, “Russian Reactions to the European Neighborhood Policy,” Problems of Post-Communism 55, 5 (September/October 2008): 40‒48.

53 As Haukkala (ibid., p. 41) points out, this process has its roots in the EU’s 1993 Copenhagen criteria for potential new members.

54 Common Strategy of the European Union of 4 June 1999 on Russia (1999/414/CFSP), p. 1.

55 Ibid., p. 2.

56 Dov Lynch, “Misperceptions and Divergences,” in Dov Lynch, ed., What Russia Sees, Chaillott Paper No. 74 (Paris: Institute for Security Studies, 2005), p. 16. As well as

116

Autocracy and Revolution, 1999–2004

time put it: “The success of enlargement has strengthened the EU’s claim that it has developed a unique capacity to promote the internal transformations of state, which is driven less by a realist calculus of military power than by the civilian tools of economic integration and moral persuasion.”57

Increasingly, the EU project and the Russian project seemed incompatible. In September 2003, just before Kuchma signed the CES agreement,

EU

Commissioner

Günter

Verheugen

acknowledged

the

incompatibility between the integration projects, telling Kuchma that

“in case of establishing a customs union as part of the CES, the European integration process for Ukraine could be stepped down or even cease completely.”58 A central dynamic of the conflict that was to emerge in 2013 was already underway in 2003. A group of Russian scholars captured this dynamic:

Shying away from participating in the European Neighborhood Policy and having revitalized its policy in the post-Soviet territory, Russia, like no one else, has influenced the [Eastern Partnership] to take the very form that causes its own most fierce criticism … Russia’s actions, aimed to consolidate the post-Soviet area, often against the will of individual states in that region, provoked retaliatory measures by Brussels and vice versa. As a result, the air of mutual distrust between the European Union and Russia was growing worse.59

Russia’s Deputy Foreign Minister Vladimir Chizhov pointed out in 2004 that while Russia acknowledged “the EU’s desire to create a friendly environment around its new borders,” it did not want to see the region become an EU “near abroad … mostly oriented to EU

standards.”60 By 2004, the European Union recognized that despite many common interests, notably in energy, the relationship had deteriorated. An uncommonly frank document identified a range of concerns, including “a more assertive Russian stance towards a number of acceding countries and the NIS.”61

continuing to support the breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, Russia had accused Georgia of harboring Chechen fighters, and in 2002 had bombed Georgia’s Pankisi Gorge region, claiming the need to attack Chechen rebels there.

57 Roland Dannreuther, “Developing the Alternative to Enlargement: The European Neighborhood Policy,” European Foreign Affairs Review 11 (2006): 183.

58 Cited in Gretskiy et al., “Russia’s Perceptions and Misperceptions,” p. 377.

59 Ibid., p. 376.

60 Chizhov is quoted in Dmitry Danilov, “Russia and European Security,” in Lynch, ed., What Russia Sees, p. 89.

61 Commission of the European Communities, Communication from the Commission to the Council and to the European Parliament, on Relations with Russia, COM(2004) 106

final, February 2, 2004.

The Evolution of Energy Politics

117

In practice, the ENP did not have much impact in Ukraine. As the British EU official Chris Patten wrote, “Europe’s most effective instrument of soft power is the offer of membership in the European Union,”

and that was not on offer for Ukraine.62 The problem with the ENP, from Ukraine’s perspective, was that it required far-reaching and nonnegotiable domestic changes without any commitment to membership.

While the ENP was modeled on the enlargement process, the fact that enlargement was not on the table made it entirely different.63

The Evolution of Energy Politics

Ukraine’s energy dependence on Russia continued to be a main avenue for conflict during this period, but the relationship evolved in two significant ways. First, in Ukraine, control of the gas trade increasingly became the focus of politics, both as the object of political machinations and as the source of power to prevail. Second, increases in global energy prices heightened Ukraine’s and Europe’s dependence on Russia and drove growth in Russia’s economy, which both legitimized Putin’s rule and increased Russia’s power. By 2005, Ukraine’s gas debt to Russia had grown to $23.9 billion.64

These developments were linked, as corruption in Ukraine facilitated Russia’s tactics of gaining political leverage from the energy trade.

Margarita Balmaceda has documented in detail how “domestic processes have been central in facilitating Russia’s use of energy for foreign policy purposes through the maintenance of old dependencies and the development of new ones.”65

In 2000‒2001, Yushchenko and his deputy Yuliya Tymoshenko introduced reforms to the energy sector that outlawed barter, increased price transparency, and reduced the scope for rent-seeking.66 Powerful oligarchs resisted, and this helps explain the coalition that developed to force Yushchenko from office in 2001 (Tymoshenko had been fired in January). As Balmaceda details, two competing trends were underway: Russian capital was gaining control of assets in Ukraine and Ukrainian 62 Chris Patten, Cousins and Strangers: America, Britain, and Europe in a New Century (New York: Henry Holt, 2006), p. 158.

63 Judith Kelley, “New Wine in Old Wineskins: Promoting Political Reforms through the New European Neighbourhood Policy,” Journal of Common Market Studies 44, 1 (2006): 29‒55.

64 Margareta M. Balmaceda, Energy Dependency, Politics and Corruption in the Former Soviet Union: Russia’s Power, Oligarchs’ Profits and Ukraine’s Missing Energy Policy, 1995‒2006

(Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge, 2009), p. 33.

65 Ibid., pp. 1‒2.

66 Ibid., pp. 54‒55.

118

Autocracy and Revolution, 1999–2004

“clans” were seeking greater control. Ukrainian groups found the money and political clout of Russian firms valuable in their battles with one another. The trick was to gain this help without losing control to Russian oligarchs. For none of these actors was the interest of the Ukrainian state vis-à-vis Russia of much concern.67

In keeping with Kuchma’s tactical reorientation toward Russia, Ukraine signed a series of energy agreements in 2000‒2004, including significant Russian investments in several Ukrainian refineries.68 In July 2000, Kuchma agreed that the state would take over energy debts, undermining the Yushchenko/Tymoshenko reforms, and giving Russia a new lever. In February 2001, the two states agreed to link their electrical grids to facilitate supply management. In October 2002, Russia and Ukraine signed a deal creating a consortium on gas transport that would have eroded Ukraine’s trump card in energy relations with Russia, its control of pipelines delivering Russian gas westward to the rest of Europe. Gaining control of these pipelines had been a goal of Russian policy since the early 1990s, so this appeared to be a major victory, but the agreement, like so many others, was never implemented.

The energy relationship stabilized, because it served most of the powerful actors’ interests: Ukrainian oligarchs reaped massive rents.

Kuchma used his ability to shape access to those rents to garner political support; Ukrainian consumers avoided the pain of reform; Russian elites also benefited from rent-seeking. The Russian government, which controlled Gazprom, was willing to tolerate payment arrears because the arrangement augmented Russia’s power in the long term in two ways. As the debt grew, the likelihood that Ukraine would need to make major concessions in lieu of being able to pay it also grew. And by not forcing a crisis, Russia helped ensure that measures to reduce Ukraine’s dependence were never taken. Europe’s gas supply at this point remained uninterrupted, so it had no reason to intervene.

The West, Russia, and Ukraine

The new US President, George W. Bush, and the new Russian President, Vladimir Putin, had a famously positive first meeting, with Bush saying afterwards that “I looked the man in the eye. I found him to be very straightforward and trustworthy. We had a very good dialogue. I was able to get a sense of his soul; a man deeply committed to his country and the best interests of his country. And I appreciated so very much the 67 Ibid., pp. 60‒61.

68 These are discussed in ibid., pp. 29‒32.

The West, Russia, and Ukraine

119

frank dialogue.” Bush went on to point out that the two states shared some common problems, such as terrorism, and stated that “The basis for my discussion began with this simple premise: that Russia and the United States must establish a new relationship beyond that of the old Cold War mentality.”69

Putin echoed Bush’s words:

I want to return now to what the President said very recently ‒ that Russia and the United States are not enemies, they do not threaten each other, and they could be fully good allies. And taking into account the fact that the United States and the Russian Federation … have accumulated huge amounts of nuclear weapons …

we bear a special responsibility for maintaining the common peace and security in the world, for building a new architecture of security in the world.

While Bush and Putin spoke with confidence about common interests, problems remained. Bush mentioned Chechnya and press freedom; Putin mentioned “some very difficult regional issues ‒ the Near East and Afghanistan and the Balkans.”70

NATO expansion continued to be a sore spot. In the spring of 2000, while campaigning for the presidency, Putin surprised many when, asked by David Frost of the BBC whether Russia could become a member of NATO, he responded: “Why not?”71 In that interview, however, he also voiced his opposition to NATO expansion, and in that context twice stressed that Russia must be “an equal partner.” In 2001, Putin laid out his thinking on NATO and Russia: “the simplest [solution] is to dissolve NATO, but this is not on the agenda. The second possible option is to include Russia in NATO. This also creates a single defense and security space. The third option is the creation of a different new organization which would set itself these tasks and which would incorporate the Russian Federation.”72 His advisor Sergei Markov pointed out the underlying problem: “Of course, the Europeans are afraid of Russia. …

If you just take a look at the map, you will see a crazy quilt kind of blanket on the left side, a lot of very small countries. And on the right looms a huge red or rosy colored part and of course they are afraid of us.”73

69 Both quotations are from Press Conference by President Bush and Russian Federation President

Putin

Brdo

Castle,

Brdo

Pri

Kranju,

Slovenia,

June

16,

2001,

www.georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2001/06/20010618.html.

70 Ibid.

71 “BBC Breakfast with Frost Interview: Vladimir Putin,” March 5, 2000. In the same interview, Putin said “it is hard for me to visualise NATO as an enemy.”

72 Peter Baker, “Putin Offers West Reassurances and Ideas on NATO,” Washington Post, July 18, 2001.

73 “Press Conference with Political Studies Institute Director Sergei Markov,” Official Kremlin International News Broadcast, June 26, 2001.

120

Autocracy and Revolution, 1999–2004

The problem of designing a post-Cold War security architecture for Europe remained unsolved. Russia sought a unified security system in which it played a leading role and held a veto. That would require dissolving, transforming, or superseding NATO. The West, including the EU, NATO, and their members, whose fear of Russia was growing, opposed dissolving NATO institutions or giving Russia a veto in it. Their implicit solution was for NATO to expand and for disagreements to be managed bilaterally between NATO and Russia. Underpinning this belief was the view that if Russia became a liberal democracy and accepted its role, problems would be minimal.

Ukraine was increasingly important in relations between Russia and the West. In 2002, responding to a question at a press conference with Kuchma, Putin said:

I am absolutely convinced that Ukraine will not shy away from the processes of expanding interaction with NATO and the Western allies as a whole. Ukraine has its own relations with NATO; there is the Ukraine-NATO Council. At the end of the day the decision is to be taken by NATO and Ukraine. It is a matter for those two partners.

He further said categorically that “Russia does not intend to join NATO.”74 Putin’s diplomatic efforts may have had unintended consequences, for while Russia’s opposition to NATO expansion was real and intensifying, western leaders could cite comments such as these as indicating that it was not an issue of fundamental concern for Russia.75

The attacks of September 11, 2001, had an immediate and far-reaching impact on US-Russia relations. US foreign policy, and by extension its relations with Europe and Russia, became increasingly dominated by the

“Global War on Terror” and in particular the war in Iraq that was launched in March 2003. Russia saw its problem in Chechnya as one of combating Islamic extremism, and perceived a new common cause with the United States. In May 2002 Secretary of State Colin Powell said 74 Vladimir Putin, “Press Statement and Answers to Questions at a Joint News Conference with Ukrainian President Leonid Kuchma,” May 17, 2002, at Kremlin website, http://

en.kremlin.ru/events/president/transcripts/21598. Putin later said that in his final meeting with President Bill Clinton he broached the idea of Russian NATO

membership. According to Putin, “Clinton answered, ‘I have no objection.’ But the entire U.S. delegation got very nervous.” See Radio Free Europe Radio Liberty, “Putin Says He Discussed Russia’s Possible NATO Membership with Bill Clinton,” June 3, 2017. It appears that Clinton has not denied Putin’s account.

75 James Golgeier and Michael McFaul speculated that “Putin had long realized that blustering about something he could not stop (as Yeltsin did) only made Russia look weaker.” James M. Goldgeier and Michael McFaul, Power and Purpose: U.S. Policy toward Russia after the Cold War (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 2003), p. 323.

The West, Russia, and Ukraine

121

that “Russia is fighting terrorists in Chechnya, there is no question about that and we understand that,” and in October 2002 the Bush administration designated three Chechen groups “terrorist organizations” and froze their assets in the United States.76 Similarly, Russia’s extensive experience in Afghanistan was potentially very helpful as the United States went to war and then tried to help build a stable government there.77 The fact that Russia welcomed US forces into Central Asia was a remarkable turnabout which Putin directed despite likely opposition within the government. That potential for improvement, however, went largely unrealized, for several reasons.

First, the United States increasingly disapproved of domestic developments in Russia. While the Bush administration had come to power speaking of a more pragmatic foreign policy, after 9/11 it focused increasingly on democratization and human rights. Neoconservatives eclipsed realist pragmatists linked with Bush’s father. Speaking at West Point in 2002, Bush said: “The 20th century ended with a single surviving model of human progress, based on non-negotiable demands of human dignity, the rule of law, limits on the power of the state, respect for women and private property and free speech and equal justice and religious tolerance.”78

From this perspective, Putin’s efforts to control Russia’s media and to sideline political competitors appeared increasingly problematic, and while sympathy concerning Chechnya grew, there was still widespread opposition to the level of violence the Russian government was applying there. Speaking in November 2003, US ambassador to Russia Alexander Vershbow worried that a perceived “values gap” would injure the relationship, pointing in particular to the pressure on the Yukos oil company and its leader, Mikhail Khodorkovsky.79 Sergei Karaganov captured the issue this way:

The political classes in Russia and the EU have a noticeable difference in basic values. … The Russian elite … seeks to join the Old World of fifty or a hundred years ago. Meanwhile, contemporary Western Europe … is developing a new, 76 Ibid., pp. 316‒317.

77 See John O’Loughlin, Gearóid Ó Tuathail, and Vladimir Kolossov, “A ‘Risky Westward Turn’? Putin’s 9-11 Script and Ordinary Russians,” Europe-Asia Studies 56, 1 (January 2004): 3‒34.

78 President Bush Delivers Graduation Speech at West Point, United States Military Academy,

West

Point,

New

York,

June

1,

2002,

www.georgewbush-

whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2002/06/20020601-3.html.

79 US State Department, “Nov. 5: U.S. Ambassador to Moscow at World Affairs Council of Philadelphia,” Press Release, November 10, 2003.

122

Autocracy and Revolution, 1999–2004

“post-European” system of values, which differs from its traditional one in renouncing the supremacy of the nation-state, [and] rejecting violence.80

While many in the West admired Putin’s discipline and pragmatism, and hoped that despite his consolidation of power, he would prove a reliable partner in international affairs, others feared that Putin sought to rebuild an authoritarian and imperial Russia. In September 2004, 115 European and American officials, including former heads of state and US senators from both major parties, released a letter stridently criticizing Putin and the West’s response to him. The letter stated that

“President Putin’s foreign policy is increasingly marked by a threatening attitude towards Russia’s neighbors and Europe’s energy security, the return of rhetoric of militarism and empire, and by a refusal to comply with Russia’s international treaty obligations.” “The leaders of the West must recognize that our current strategy toward Russia is failing.” The correct course, they contended, was to “put ourselves unambiguously on the side of democratic forces.”81

Many Russian elites had completely different interpretations of Putin’s rule thus far, seeing it as “getting Russia back on its feet,” and having prevented the country from fragmenting and stabilizing it after the chaos of the 1990s.82 Similarly, Karaganov criticized what he called the notion of “democracy as a panacea for all social and economic problems,” and worried that “[t]he international system, based on the primacy of sovereign states and the central role of the United Nations in governing international

relations,

is

weakening.”83 More broadly, Andrei

Tsygankov details how Russians across the political spectrum rejected Francis Fukuyama’s “end of history” thesis and the liberal normative 80 Sergei Karaganov, “Russia and the International Order,” in Lynch, ed., What Russia Sees, p. 33. Karaganov goes on (p. 40) to point out that “this difference is greater with Europe … and somewhat smaller with the United States.”

81 See “The Truth on Russia,” The Washington Post, October 2, 2004, p. A20. The text of the letter is at www.aei.org/publication/an-open-letter/. Signatories included former Czech President Vaclav Havel, former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, Senator John McCain, as well as former Italian Prime Ministers Giuliano Amato and Massimo D’Alema, former Swedish Prime Minister Carl Bildt, and Chair of the German Green Party Reinhard Bütikofer.

82 Alexei Pushkov, “Putin at the Helm,” in Lynch, ed., What Russia Sees, p. 46. Pushkov’s essay, representative of moderate Russian thinking at the time, clearly lays out the case for Putin’s changes.

83 Karaganov, “Russia and the International Order,” p. 24. It is notable that Russian leaders often spoke of the importance of the UN in governing the international system, when most observers around the world found the role of the UN in managing world affairs to be much more of a hope than a reality.

The West, Russia, and Ukraine

123

hegemony it assumed.84 Tsygankov asserts that this thinking “denied Russia the legitimacy of its search for a post-Cold War identity of its own,” contributing to the rise of “radically anti-western forces” in Russia.85

Second, in December 2001, just when US-Russian cooperation in Afghanistan was ramping up, the Bush administration announced that the United States was withdrawing from the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty. While building a ballistic missile defense (BMD) system had been a goal of US conservatives and defense contractors since Ronald Reagan’s 1983 “Star Wars” speech, Russia had steadily opposed such a deployment for several reasons. The ABM Treaty itself was seen by Russia as “the cornerstone of global strategic stability,”86 and abrogating it was seen as a dangerous effort to gain a unilateral advantage.

The fact that deployment of the system would require basing components in the new NATO members in central Europe further underscored the strategic impact of NATO enlargement.

Putin was frustrated that efforts to renegotiate the treaty rather than have the United States withdraw were rejected. Yet he refrained from the kind of rhetoric that became common later, saying “In the course of our contacts with President Bush, on no occasion did he deceive me or mislead me … He always does what he says, and in that respect he is a reliable partner. … Of course we have differences of opinion on some issues. … If we treat each other as partners, solutions can be found.”87

Putin was apparently more focused on strengthening Russia’s role in NATO, and did not want to undermine that effort. “If we intend to change the nature of our relationship between Russia and the West, Russia and the U.S., and if we take the road suggested by British Prime Minister Tony Blair concerning changing the relationship between Russia and NATO, then this overall question of confrontation will lose its relevance.”88 In the short term, this mild response won Putin considerable praise in the West.89 However, in the longer term, Russia’s perception was that “[W]hile widely acclaimed in the United States and Europe, this policy produced few practical gains for Russia.”90

84 See Andrei Tsygankov, “Rediscovering National Interests after the ‘End of History’: Fukuyama, Russian Intellectuals, and a Post-Cold War Order,” International Politics 39

(December 2002): 423‒446.

85 Ibid., p. 325.

86 Pushkov, “Putin at the Helm,” p. 56.

87 Megan Twohey, “Putin Says Russia Was Ready to Alter ABM,” Moscow Times, December 18, 2001.

88 Ibid.

89 See, for example, Jim Heintz, “Two Years after Putin’s Rise, Russia has Veered to Unexpected Western-oriented Course,” Associated Press, December 30, 2001.

90 Pushkov, “Putin at the Helm,” p. 56.

124

Autocracy and Revolution, 1999–2004

The disappointment over the US decision on the ABM treaty did not prevent the establishment of the NATO-Russia Council in May 2002, replacing the Permanent Joint Council from the 1997 NATO-Russia Founding Act. The goal was to “provide a mechanism for consultation, consensus-building, cooperation, joint decision, and joint action for the member states of NATO and Russia on a wide spectrum of security issues in the Euro-Atlantic region” and to “serve as the principal structure and venue for advancing the relationship between NATO and Russia.”91 A new provision moved in exactly the direction Russia sought: On some topics, the states would meet as a single group of states (“at 20”

in the jargon), rather than in NATO-plus-Russia (“19+1”) format.

Moreover, this group would “operate on the principle of consensus,”

giving each member, including Russia, a veto. While these arrangements applied only to those issues which the states agreed to address in this format, it appeared to be a step toward the kind of NATO that Russia would see as an asset rather than a threat. It would become more like a collective security organization with a Russian veto. “The new Council represented a first attempt to transform traditional Russia-West cooperation into a partnership of equals.”92 The process kicked off a debate within Russia concerning whether Russia should aim to join NATO.93

While Russia was opposed to the NATO’s decision in November 2002 to admit more new members, including the Baltic States, its response was muted.

The deepening relationship between Russia and NATO ignored a serious contradiction: The formation of the NATO-Russia Council was meant to assuage Russia’s concern about expansion by giving it a larger voice. But to the extent that Russia had real influence in NATO decision making, it would seek to block expansion. Thus, Russia’s influence in NATO was predicated upon Russia acquiescing to what it most objected to. As long as Europe’s relations with Russia were improving, that might work, but as Europe and the United States increasingly objected to Putin’s policies, it became untenable. In the short term, however, it was acrimony over Iraq that halted the warming in NATO-Russia relations.

A third factor undermining relations between the West and Russia was the US decision to invade Iraq. The Bush administration advanced two 91 “NATO-Russia Relations: A New Quality. Declaration by Heads of State and Government of NATO Member States and the Russian Federation,” Rome, May 28, 2002.

92 Dmitry Danilov, “Russia and European Security,” in Lynch, ed., What Russia Sees, p. 80.

93 Ibid., p. 81.

The West, Russia, and Ukraine

125

primary reasons to attack: self-defense against a potential attack with weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and enforcement of earlier UN

Security Council resolutions concerning Iraq’s WMD program. Russia objected to the attack, insisting that there was no imminent threat that invoked self-defense and that the resolutions in question (some of which dated to 1991‒1992) did not in fact authorize the use of force in 2003.94

The invasion raised many of the same resentments that intervention in Yugoslavia had. Russia had extensive economic interests in Iraq that it wanted to protect, both in energy and in a large debt owed by the Saddam Hussein regime for weapons purchases. It also sought to resist further US pretensions to global hegemony.

Russia had resisted US blandishments to gain its support for a resolution authorizing force in Iraq, with Putin saying “we are not going to bargain, as if we were in an oriental market, selling our position in exchange for some economic benefits.”95 Just after the invasion began in March 2003, Putin warned that it was “in danger of rocking the foundations of global stability and international law,” and said that the

“only correct solution to the Iraqi problem is the immediate end to military activity in Iraq and resumption of a political settlement in the UN Security Council.”96 Maintaining a positive spin on relations with the United States was becoming harder. Sergei Karaganov argued that Russia’s management of the disagreement over Iraq was “skillfully ‘stage-managed,’” and that as a result, “real friction over the military operation in Iraq arose between the United States and its traditional partners in NATO and not with Russia.”97

Russia hoped to take advantage of western disagreements about Iraq to pursue its goal of bringing Russia into Europe and reducing the US role. Both Germany and France strongly opposed the US decision to attack Iraq, and France joined Russia in threatening to veto a resolution authorizing the invasion. Many Europeans shared Russia’s qualms about US claims to global hegemony and willingness to use military power. This opportunity was lost, in the view of a Russia commentator, 94 The validity of the Bush administration’s arguments for going to war in Iraq was contested far beyond Russia. For a discussion of different perspectives, see Brian C.

Schmidt and Michael C. Williams, “The Bush Doctrine and the Iraq War: Neoconservatives versus Realists,” Security Studies 17 (2008): 191–220.

95 Quoted in Goldgeier and McFaul, Power and Purpose, p. 327.

96 Carolynne Wheeler, “Weight of War Strains U.S.-Russia Relations: Putin and Bush Exchange Accusations on Iraq, Antitank Missiles and Spy Planes,” Toronto Globe and Mail, March 29, 2003, p. A8.

97 Karaganov, “Russia and the International Order,” p. 31.

126

Autocracy and Revolution, 1999–2004

because “European criticism of the war in Chechnya poisoned the relationship.”98

It is hard to overestimate the impact of the invasion of Iraq. Proceeding as it did without the approval of the UN Security Council, it was seen by Russia and by several US allies in Europe as an illegal use of force. The impression created was that the United States obeyed the “rules of the road” only when it suited their interests. The invasion eroded the norm against using force to resolve disputes, and it badly divided the western alliance. While those who blame the West for the events of 2014 tend to focus on the effects of NATO expansion, the invasion of Iraq might have had a larger impact in undermining the order the West was trying to build in Europe.

The period from 1999 to late 2004 was, despite many difficulties, one in which Russia and the United States perceived a renewed potential to work together. Although Putin was consolidating power at home and continuing to assert Russia’s interests in the near abroad, he clearly sought positive relations with both the United States and Europe. That hope was reciprocated, but it was not clear that that the sides could agree on the basic terms on which cooperation would be built. The Orange Revolution dramatically reshaped Putin’s assessment of relations with the West. For all of its international consequences, however, the Orange Revolution was above all about Ukrainian domestic politics.

The Orange Revolution: Prelude

The tensions that emerged on the streets in November 2004 reflected long-term institutional, regional, and oligarchic conflicts in Ukraine.99

Institutionally, there was a conflict between president, prime minister, and parliament that had festered since the early independence period.

Regionally, Ukrainian leaders had failed to build parties that stretched across Ukraine’s east and west, and increasingly were using regional identities to mobilize voters, accentuating rather than bridging the regional divide. This was especially true of Yanukovych, who, with advice from Russia, painted the opposition as fascist supporters of the controversial World War II-era figure Stepan Bandera. The oligarchs were in a constant struggle for power, in which each tried to gain at the others’

98 Pushkov, “Putin at the Helm,” p. 57.

99 The long-term roots of the Orange Revolution are stressed by Serhiy Kudelia, who dates the beginning of the crisis to 2000‒2001. See Serhiy Kudelia, “Revolutionary Bargain: The Unmaking of Ukraine’s Autocracy through Pacting,” Journal of Communist Studies and Transition Politics 23, 1 (2007): 77‒100.

The Orange Revolution: Prelude

127

expense and all of them feared that one of the others might become dominant.

It was widely anticipated that the 2004 election would be pivotal for Ukraine, because one of two things had to happen. If the election were free and fair, many believed, Kuchma (or his designated successor) would be defeated, reversing Ukraine’s slide toward authoritarianism.

Kuchma and his supporters were expected to try to rig the election through tactics including controlling the media, patronage, and fraud.

That would consolidate autocracy and likely move Ukraine away from the West and toward Russia. Therefore, well before the election, opposition groups were preparing to run a parallel vote count and to challenge fraud through protest.

The United States and European Union preferred Yushchenko to Yanukovych, and they believed that if the election were free and fair, he would prevail. There was, however, no international plot to instigate a revolution. The international environment apart from Russia was important in four respects. First, the examples of the “Bulldozer Revolution” in Serbia and the “Rose Revolution” in Georgia provided examples of how fraudulent elections could help mobilize a critical mass of protesters, tactics that were central particularly to the Pora student movement.100 Second, those two examples yielded a group of young, committed protest leaders who were willing to share their tactics and experience with Ukrainians, who already had extensive experience of their own, reaching back to the “Revolution on the Granite” of the late Soviet era. Because fraud was anticipated so far in advance, there was plenty of time to prepare protests. Third, western organizations, with a mix of NGO and governmental funding, provided training on how to conduct exit polling and alternative vote counts.101 The fact that the elections were still being carried out under relatively open procedures facilitated vote checking. Fourth, once protests started, western leaders put considerable pressure on Kuchma not to forcibly repress the protests, and instead helped broker the talks that led to the resolution of the crisis.

The key developments were internal. There was speculation in Ukraine that Kuchma himself would run for a third term. While the 100 On Pora, see Oleksandr Sushko and Olena Prystayko, “Pora ‒ ‘It’s Time’ for Democracy in Ukraine,” in Anders Åslund and Michael McFaul, eds., Revolution in Orange: The Origins of Ukraine's Democratic Breakthrough (Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2006), pp. 85‒102.

101 For a detailed accounting of the amounts involved, see Andrew Wilson, Ukraine’s Orange Revolution (New Haven, CT: Yale, 2005), pp. 184‒186. Wilson points out that due to anger over the Kolchuga missile affair, US support for democratization in Ukraine actually decreased in 2003.

128

Autocracy and Revolution, 1999–2004

Ukrainian constitution specified a two-term limit, many believed that Kuchma could get a court to rule that since the constitution wasn’t adopted until after his first election, his first term did not count under the rule. It is not clear why Kuchma did not choose this option. His unpopularity may have convinced him he could not win; the increasingly powerful Donetsk clan may have insisted that its turn had arrived; Kuchma may not have wanted to undermine his own self-image as a democratic ruler.

It seemed like a “major mistake” to nominate Yanukovych to carry the torch for Kuchma and the Party of Regions.102 Yanukovych was a convicted criminal, lacked charisma, and was widely unpopular outside the Donbas. Even so, and even after fraud in the second round had been exposed, he won 44 percent of the vote in the rerun of the second round.

This implies that a more compelling establishment candidate would have been able to win fairly. However, that was not how the Party of Regions or Kuchma approached the election. The Party of Regions had won the

“right,” or at least had the power, to choose the candidate of the establishment, and its leader was Yanukovych.

Equally important was the ability of the opposition to unify. From the moment of independence in 1991, Ukraine’s “pro-western” forces were notorious for their tendency for infighting (which would return after the Orange Revolution; see Chapter 5). Recognizing Yushchenko’s popularity, Yuliya Tymoshenko agreed to withdraw her candidacy to support him. Yushchenko and Tymoshenko made a formidable team, with her charisma and confrontational approach complementing his image as a competent and honest technocrat. A wide variety of interests, ranging from idealistic student groups to self-interested oligarchs, grouped around this duo. The pro-Yushchenko forces were motivated in large part by the belief that a Yanukovych victory meant an end to democracy and to Ukraine’s European aspirations.

In the weeks and months before the election, both sides prepared for a contest in the streets. The opposition honed tactics of decentralized organization. The government fortified key buildings. A few weeks before the election, when opposition leaders held a demonstration at the Central Electoral Commission, the authorities deployed water cannon. This was a practice run for both sides.

102 Van Zon, “Political Culture and Neo-Patrimonialism under Leonid Kuchma,” p. 21; see also Taras Kuzio, “From Kuchma to Yushchenko: Ukraine’s 2004 Presidential Elections and the Orange Revolution,” Problems of Post-Communism 52, 2 (March/April 2005): 33‒35.

The Orange Revolution: Crisis and Aftermath 129

Into this situation, Vladimir Putin stepped boldly.103 Putin sent one team of advisors, led by Gleb Pavlovskii, to Kyiv and another, led by Vyacheslav Nikonov, to Yanukvych’s headquarters in Donetsk to help manage Yanukovych’s campaign.104 Russia’s strategy was based on two assumptions. First, it assumed that if the choice were framed as one between the West and Russia, voters would choose Russia. Second, it assumed that the same tactics that worked in Russia (media blitz, coercion of state employees, voting fraud, and falsification of results), would work in Ukraine.105 The week before the first round of the election, Putin traveled to Kyiv, appearing with Kuchma, Yanukovych, and Belarusian leader Alyaksandr Lukashenka at a huge military parade on Khreshchatyk. While in Kyiv, he gave a television interview, holding out the hope that visa restrictions between the two countries would be reduced.106 Russian media praised Yanukovych widely and ran negative stories on Yushchenko. After Yushchenko ran surprisingly strongly in the first round (the official results put Yushchenko in front with 39.9

percent of the vote to 39.3 percent, but a delay in announcing them stoked the belief that the numbers had been manipulated and that Yushchenko’s lead was much greater), Putin returned to Kyiv a second time before the second round. In contrast, the Bush administration kept a lower profile, perhaps, as Novosti put it, “because his advisers realize that his blessing for Yushchenko would send voters running the other way.”107

The Orange Revolution: Crisis and Aftermath

The general story of the Orange Revolution is well known. After the second round, held on November 21, Yanukovych was announced as the winner, but exit polls indicated that Yushchenko had won and falsification of the vote was revealed. Protesters occupied the Maidan Nezalezhnosti. Eventually, a “pact” was reached that combined a rerun of the second round of the election with constitutional changes to reduce the 103 Russia’s involvement in the campaign is detailed in Nikolai Petrov and Andrei Ryabov,

“Russia’s Role in the Orange Revolution,” in Åslund and McFaul, eds., Revolution in Orange, pp. 145‒164.

104 Ibid., p. 153.

105 Ibid., pp. 148‒149.

106 For a contemporary description of the event, see Nick Paton Walsh, “Putin’s Kiev Visit

‘Timed to Influence Ukraine Poll’: President’s Remarks Helpful to Pro-Moscow Candidate, but Aides Deny any Attempt to Help Ally,” The Guardian, October 27, 2004, p. 14.

107 “Putin’s Intense Interest in Elections,” RIA Novosti, November 17, 2004.

130

Autocracy and Revolution, 1999–2004

power of the presidency.108 The second round of the election was rerun on December 26, with Yushchenko winning.

In addition to the protesters in the streets, Ukraine’s oligarchs played a large role in the revolution, probably out of fear of what a Yanukovych presidency might mean for them. A prominent example of oligarchic cooperation with the protests was that Channel 5, the television channel owned by Petro Poroshenko, defied Kuchma and broadcast positive news about the protests.109 A second example was that in contrast to the “Ukraine without Kuchma” protests a few years earlier, when the Maidan was shut down and transport into Kyiv disrupted, transport to Kyiv and within it remained unchecked, and the Maidan was wide open.

Kyiv Mayor Omelchenko and the Kyiv City Council, who had helped foil protests in 2001, denounced the results of the election. Finally, and in contrast to 2014, the security services signaled clearly that they would not violently repress the protesters. C. J. Chivers of the New York Times reported that the Security Service of Ukraine (SBU; successor to the Soviet KGB) signaled that it would defend the protesters if they were attacked by Interior Ministry forces.110

The oligarchs were intent on preserving their autonomy, and hence would oppose anyone becoming so powerful that he could control them, as Putin had done in Russia. They also feared too much Russian influence. “Ukrainian oligarchic groups … do not desire to come under Moscow’s control again as they are unable to compete directly against Russia’s more powerful oligarchs.”111 Therefore, while on many matters the interests of the oligarchs coincided with those of Russia, in this case the interests of at least some of them did not. This does not mean that they were “pro-Yushchenko” or “pro-western” in any meaningful sense.

It simply means that they preferred a leader who supported pluralism, and couldn’t undo it even if he wanted to, to a leader with both the means and inclination to end Ukraine’s political pluralism.

As in 2014, the tipping point occurred in parliament, where Kuchma’s and Yanukovych’s support crumbled as the scale of fraud became clear and as it looked more like Yushchenko would triumph. On November 108 On the Orange Revolution as an example of “pacting,” see Serhiy Kudelia,

“Revolutionary Bargain: The Unmaking of Ukraine’s Autocracy through Pacting,”

Journal of Communist Studies and Transition Politics 23, 1 (2007): 77‒100.

109 In addition to Poroshenko, Wilson ( Ukraine’s Orange Revolution, p. xi) lists David Zhvaniia and Yevhen Chervonenko as important business supporters of Yushchenko.

110 C. J. Chivers, “How Top Spies in Ukraine Changed the Nation’s Path,” The New York Times, January 17, 2005. See also Wilson, Ukraine’s Orange Revolution, pp. 137‒138, who points to some doubts about the extent of SBU collaboration with the protesters.

111 Haran and Pavlenko, “The Paradoxes of Kuchma’s Russian Policy,” p. 2.

The Orange Revolution: Crisis and Aftermath 131

27, five days after the vote, the parliament held a non-binding vote declaring the election invalid. Yanukovych’s support was collapsing as elites strived to shift to the winning side.

The dispute predictably put the West and Russia on different sides and reinforced mutual perceptions of bad faith. Putin and EU leaders discussed the matter face to face at a previously scheduled EU-Russia summit on November 25 in The Hague. The summit had been postponed due to a lack of agreement on how to proceed on EU-Russia cooperation. The events in Ukraine, therefore, came at a time when the European Union and Russia were already struggling to find common ground, and it was precisely about democracy and Russia’s role abroad that they disagreed.

The dispute in Ukraine dramatically reinforced existing EU-Russia tensions, despite considerable desire on both sides to bridge the gaps.

When the European Union announced that it rejected the second round of the vote, the Russian Foreign Ministry reacted angrily: The ministry cannot welcome the recent statement by the EU Office chairman qualifying the second round of the polls in Ukraine as counter to world standards and to the will of the Ukrainian people. Though the statement expresses hopes that the authorities and the sides concerned will not resort to violence, the plea itself indicates that Brussels, on the one hand, ignores the fundamental democratic principle ‒ respect for the people’s will [‒] and on the [other] hand, is overtly pushing the opposition toward infringement [of the] law and use of force … Since the outset, that is already during the first round, the only position favoured by the EU was that of either Victor Yushchenko will win, or the elections will be found anti-democratic, falsified and counter to world standards. He has lost and the EU reaction is quite predictable. But what has it to do with democracy and impartiality?112

According to Wilson, the harshness of this response (which came early in the crisis, on November 25) increased the EU’s resolve to get involved in the crisis, and prompted Javier Solana, the high representative for foreign policy, to join Polish President Kwasniewski in traveling to Kyiv.113

This statement captured much of what was to become an orthodox Russian position on the Orange Revolution, having three key pillars.

First, the West made up its mind ahead of time that the only acceptable 112 “‘The European Union’s actual appeals to revise the results of the presidential elections in Ukraine are somewhat embarrassing,’ the Russian Foreign Ministry has thus commented on Dutch Foreign Minister Bernard Bot’s statement,” RIA Novosti, November 23, 2004.

113 Wilson, Ukraine’s Orange Revolution, p. 138. Wilson points out that Kwasniewski’s and Solana’s presence in Kyiv brought credibility to the protests and bought time, by delaying any moves by the authorities.

132

Autocracy and Revolution, 1999–2004

outcome was a Yushchenko win. Second, the West, rather than internal Ukrainian opposition, was primarily responsible for the protests and overturning of the second-round result. Third, the process of overturning the result showed that the West’s support for democracy and the rule of law was hypocritical and rife with double standards. For many in the West, Russia’s credibility was undermined by its strident denial of such obvious fraud.

Despite this disagreement, the European Union and Russia jointly mediated the dispute, with a group consisting of Polish President Alexander Kwasniewski, Lithuanian President Valdas Adamkus, EU High Representative for Common Foreign and Security Policy Javier Solana, OSCE Secretary General Jan Kubish; and Speaker of the Russian Duma Boris Gryzlov.114 This mediation may have prevented escalation by one side or the other, but did not itself lead to a resolution.115

The resolution came through a domestic bargaining process, in which the main Ukrainian participants were Yushchenko, Yanukovych, President Kuchma, and Speaker of the Parliament Volodymyr Lytvyn. The deal that was eventually hammered out traded rerunning of the second round of the election (which Yushchenko and the protesters demanded) for constitutional revisions reducing the president’s powers.

Kuchma and his supporters, understanding they would likely lose any rerun of the election, wanted a less powerful presidency if they were not going to control it. Many others in Ukraine had long argued that the presidency was too powerful. Implementing the deal within the law and constitution took some gymnastics. While the Supreme Court had ordered the second round of the election rerun, a new election could not be implemented without changes to the election law. This gave parliament considerable weight, and gave Yushchenko incentive to compromise on the presidential powers. Yanukovych objected to the deal, but many of his allies were willing to bow to what appeared to be inevitable, accepting a rerun of the election in return for a weakening of the presidency. The election was rerun on December 26, with Yushchenko winning by 52 to 44 percent. This time, the OSCE declared the vote to be free and fair, while the CIS Election Monitoring Organization determined it to be fraudulent.

In the midst of this dispute, a group of Yanukovych supporters sought to organize an autonomy movement in the Donbas. On November 28, an 114 Kudelia, “Revolutionary Bargain,” pp. 94‒97, provides a detailed discussion of the negotiations.

115 Anders Åslund and Michael McFaul, “Introduction: Perspectives on the Orange Revolution,” in Åslund and McFaul, eds., Revolution in Orange, p. 3.

The Orange Revolution: Crisis and Aftermath 133

“all-Ukrainian Congress” was held at an ice rink in Severodonetsk, in Luhansk oblast. Beneath a Russian flag, and joined by Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov, who called the opposition a “sabbath of witches,” delegates from eastern Ukraine and Crimea voted to hold a referendum on regional autonomy (federalism, not secession) if Yanukovych were not confirmed as the president.116 The group declared: “In the worst-case scenario of the political situation in the country, we will be united and decisive in defending the will of the Ukrainian people, including holding a referendum on a possible change in the administrative and territorial status of Ukraine.”117 Odesa Mayor Ruslan Bodelan discussed forming a

“Novorossiya,” another prelude of what was to come in 2014.118 These initiatives went no further, apparently because they failed to draw support from other elites or from much of the public. On December 2, Kuchma traveled to Moscow to consult with Putin, and on December 3 Putin, recognizing defeat, announced his support for rerunning the second round of the election.

Consequences of the Orange Revolution

“This was our 9/11,” said Gleb Pavlovskii.119 Russia was vulnerable in a way that it had not realized, it had been humiliated, and it was determined to act. If many Russians had assumed that sooner or later Ukraine would return to the fold, the Orange Revolution raised the prospect that it might be lost permanently, and western interference was seen as being to blame.120 In some respects, the rest of this book is about the consequences of the Orange Revolution. The Russian press agreed that the events were a disaster. Pravda said that “Russia no longer exists as a world-class power,” blaming the United States and worrying that Russia would be cut off from gas markets in the West.

Kommersant predicted that “the Orange Revolution virus will now 116 C. J. Chivers and Steven Lee Myers, “Premier’s Camp Signals a Threat to Ukraine Unity,” New York Times, November 29, 2004, p. 1.

117 “Pro-Russia Ukraine Regions Threaten Split after Disputed Vote,” Agence France Presse, November 28, 2004.

118 “Ukrainian President Should Have Acted Differently, Says Kuchma Spokesman,” BBC

Summary of World Broadcasts, December 24, 2004.

119 Quoted in Ben Judah, Fragile Empire: How Russia Fell In and Out of Love with Vladimir Putin (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2013), p. 85.

120 Tor Bukkvoll, “Why Putin Went to War: Ideology, Interests, and Decision-making in the Russian Use of Force in Crimea and the Donbas,” Contemporary Politics 22, 3

(2016): 268.

134

Autocracy and Revolution, 1999–2004

spread to Russia” and that “It will not take long to dismantle the new Russian totalitarianism.”121

The Orange Revolution was not exactly a turning point, because the various actors were already on a trajectory of increasing mistrust and conflict. But it dramatically heightened mutual mistrust and hostility. It led to domestic changes in both Russia and Ukraine that undermined their relations with each other and Russia’s relations with the West. For all of the difficulties of the relationship from 1999 to late 2004, all of the actors sought ways to reconcile their competing goals and interests. After the Orange Revolution, this was much less true.

Russia’s anger was directed primarily at the United States and NATO, rather than the EU. Speaking to reporters in Moscow on December 10, Putin said:

If Ukraine wants to enter the EU and is welcomed there, then we can only be pleased. The issues of EU enlargement to include Ukraine does not concern us.

We have a special relationship with Ukraine, economies that are closely interlinked, a very high degree of industrial cooperation. So the inclusion of that part of our economy in the European structure would, I hope, have a positive effect on Russia as well.122

In Ukraine, the change in pathway was dramatic, but ultimately less dramatic than it seemed. It is unlikely that Viktor Yanukovych would simply have delivered Ukraine into Russia’s hands (he did not do so when he became president in 2010). Instead, his election would likely have led to consolidation of late Kuchma-era politics of autocratization.

Whether he would have been able to consolidate hegemonic power (to form a “single-pyramid” system, in Hale’s terms) is not certain.

Nevertheless, his election would likely have played to Russia’s advantage, which is why Russia worked so hard to promote it. Similarly, while it looked at the time as if Yushchenko was going to decisively turn the country westward, that happened in style more than in substance.

In early December, at the height of the crisis, Yushchenko stressed that

“We aren’t going to choose only one side ‒ Europe or Russia.”123

Most dangerous for Russia was the merger of democratization and geopolitics represented by the Orange Revolution. The Orange 121 Pravda and Kommersant are quoted in: Steven Eke, “Russians Rush to Rethink Ukraine,” BBC, December 27, 2004.

122 “Putin Says Russia Has no Objection to Ukraine’s Joining European Union,”

Associated Press International, December 10, 2004. It may have been the case that Putin thought that EU membership for Ukraine was so unlikely that there was no reason to oppose it.

123 Anna Melnichuk, “Ukraine President Asks Opposition to Stop Blockades; Scheduled Meeting of Rivals not Held,” Associated Press, November 28, 2004.

The Orange Revolution: Crisis and Aftermath 135

Revolution appeared to consolidate the methodology of what Mark Beis-singer called “modular revolutions.” This tactic had been used to bring about an enormous geopolitical reverse for Russia, and it seemed to be aimed at other Russian neighbors. It had already been applied in Georgia, Kyrgyzstan was next, and there was even hope in the West for Belarus’s 2006 election. Most worrying was the idea that such protests might threaten the Putin regime itself. Putin’s representative to the EU, Sergei Yastrzhembsky, said at the height of the crisis:

In general, one gets the impression, unfortunately, that certain forces in the West have concluded that the post-Soviet space can be tested for strength by using the technologies of the so-called street anarchy and street democracy, call it what you like. These methods were tested in their time in Poland, I mean in the era of Solidarity; and more recently they were tested in Belgrade.124

The Orange Revolution changed Russian thinking in three ways. First, Russia viewed the colored revolutions as a tactic in substitute of war, and concluded that Russia had to learn what Pavlovskii called “the new revolutionary technologies of the globalization era.”125 The result was what later came to called the “Gerasimov doctrine” of hybrid war.126

Similarly, Russian analysts wrote about Joseph Nye’s concept of “soft power,” which they tended to see as an instrument for coercion or subversion, not as a force of attraction.127 “If we had had the power to consult our Ukrainian partners on preventative counter-revolution, and not just elections, then this misfortune wouldn’t have occurred,” Pavlovskii said.128 These efforts led to the tactics deployed in 2014.

124 TV Interview with Presidential Special Representative for European Union Sergei Yastrzhembsky Zerkalo RTR Saturday Program with Nikolai Svanidze, 20:20, November 27, 2004, Official Kremlin International News Broadcast, November 29, 2004.

125 Quoted in Wilson, Ukraine’s Orange Revolution, p. 175.

126 See Valerii Gerasimov, “Tsennost’ Nauki v Predvidennii,” Boenno-Promyshlennyi Kur’er, No. 8, February 27‒March 5, 2013, pp. 1‒2. Mark Galeotti, who coined the term “Gerasimov Doctrine,” stressed that Gerasimov’s article does not really express a

“doctrine,” but rather the prevailing understanding in Russia of what had happened in the colored revolutions and the Arab Spring. See Mark Galeotti, “The Mythical

‘Gerasimov Doctrine’ and the Language of Threat,” Critical Studies on Security (2018):

1‒5,

https://doi.org/10.1080/21624887.2018.1441623.

Gerasimov

had

written: “The experience of military conflicts including the so-called color revolutions in the North Africa and the Middle East confirms that a fully thriving state in a matter of months and even days can be transformed into an arena of intense armed struggle, become a victim of foreign intervention, and plunge into the depths of chaos, humanitarian catastrophe and civil war.”

127 See “Alexander Sergunin and Leonid Karabeshkin, “Understanding Russia’s Soft Power Strategy,” Politics 35, 3‒5 (2015): 347‒363.

128 Quoted in Wilson, Ukraine’s Orange Revolution, p. 175.

136

Autocracy and Revolution, 1999–2004

Second, the Russian leadership sought to preempt any such revolution in Russia by adopting a range of measures that included the formation of the youth group Nashi and restrictions on foreign NGOs. This additional suppression of democracy widened the perceived normative gap between Russia and the West. Third, Russia began pushing back against the international spread of democracy. Emphasis on the doctrine of “noninterference” increased, in spite of Russia’s claims to a role in the “near abroad.” Moreover, Russian leaders and theorists openly attacked the notion that values such as democracy are universally valid. Having invoked Nye on soft power, they also invoked Samuel Huntington on

“civilizational pluralism.”129 Along with China and the Central Asian states, they started the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) as a bulwark against democracy promotion in the region. Overall, the response to democracy promotion was autocracy promotion.

As well as making Russia less trustful and more resentful of the West, the Orange Revolution dramatically reshaped western attitudes toward Russia. Both among the media and among policymakers, the near-unanimous opinion was that Russian behavior in Ukraine was both cynical and aggressive. The peaceful protests in Kyiv and Yushchenko’s persistence after his poisoning inspired admiration, while the obvious election fraud and Putin’s support for it were viewed as signs of bad faith.

A few western commentators railed against what they saw as double standards, but they were in a decided minority.130

The Orange Revolution was especially corrosive to Russia’s relations with the European Union. The episode consolidated the views that Putin was part of the problem, that Russia was using illegitimate tactics in Ukraine, and that Russia’s goals were not compatible with those of the EU. The transformation of EU policy was dramatic. “The EU was ambivalent and hesitant to begin with because although the new EU

member states favored promoting democracy in Ukraine, the old EU

members began from a Russia-first position. However, as violations of democratic practice became rampant, the EU united around a prodemocracy position.”131 In January 2005, the European Parliament voted overwhelmingly for Ukraine to be given “a clear European 129 See, for example, Boris Nezhuyev, “‘Island Russia’ and Russia’s Identity Politics,”

Russia in Global Affairs, June 6, 2017; Andrei P. Tsygankov, “Pluralism or Isolation of Civilizations? Russia’s Foreign Policy Discourse and the Reception of Huntington’s Paradigm of the Post-Cold War World,” Geopolitics 4, 3 (December 1999): 47‒72.

130 See, for example, Stephen F. Cohen, “The Media’s New Cold War,” The Nation, January 31, 2005.

131 Åslund and McFaul, “Introduction,” pp. 6‒7.

Conclusion

137

perspective, possibly leading to EU membership.”132 This led eventually to the draft Association Agreement that kicked off the crisis in 2013.

Conclusion

While the Orange Revolution was driven mostly by factors internal to Ukraine, the international consequences were dramatic. Most important, the Orange Revolution tightened the links between the Ukraine-Russia relationship and the Russia-West relationship, making both harder to solve. Prior to the Orange Revolution, Russia and the West assumed that their underlying interests coincided, and that they could work through any problems. After the Orange Revolution, they increasingly saw each other as adversaries, and saw Ukraine as a critical area of disagreement.

Similarly, it became clear that despite the 1997 Friendship Treaty, Russia and Ukraine continued to disagree fundamentally on Ukraine’s independence. As leaders in both Russia and the West saw the power of protest to disrupt Russia’s plans, democratization became almost inseparable from geopolitics.

By the end of the Orange Revolution in January 2005, it looked as though Ukraine had made a decisive turn westward. Adrian Karatnycky wrote at the time that it “set a major new landmark in the postcommunist history of eastern Europe, a seismic shift Westward in the geopolitics of the region.”133 Inside Ukraine, however, the “revolution” was more about continuity than change. The oligarchs who supported it were trying to defend, not overthrow, the political status quo in Ukraine.

Similarly, the elites who brokered the compromise that ended the crisis were interested in tweaking the system, not overturning it. Many of the people who came to power were less interested in rooting out corruption than in getting their share of the benefits from it. Ukraine continued to be economically dependent on Russia, which limited its options, and it continued to be regionally divided, which further limited the likelihood of a dramatic foreign policy reorientation. While the European Union was inspired to get more involved, it maintained its standards and waited for prospective partners to meet them.

Ukraine’s conflict with Russia and the West’s conflict with Russia were now tightly bound together. The fact that the security dilemma had intensified with no change in Ukraine’s (or any other actor’s) military capabilities was due to the role that democratization had come to play in 132 Adrian Karatnycky, “Ukraine’s Orange Revolution,” Foreign Affairs 84, 2 (March‒April 2005): 50.

133 Ibid., p. 35.

138

Autocracy and Revolution, 1999–2004

the region’s geopolitics. The more Ukraine was viewed as having to choose either Russia or the West, the more intractable its regional divisions would become, and the more the West-Russia relationship would be a zero-sum game. For the West, and for pro-western Ukrainians, there was a new status quo, and efforts to undermine it would be seen as a threat. For Russia, and for pro-Russian Ukrainians, the status quo had been unfairly disrupted, and needed to be restored. Both sides’

fear of losing something vital was increased. Rather than increasing a sense of urgency about reducing tensions, the Orange Revolution convinced both sides of the rightness of their views and the malign intentions of the other.





5

Reform and Reversal, 2004‒2010

On December 27, 2004, Viktor Yushchenko, in a victory speech, said

“We are free. The old era is over. We are a new country now.”1 Nearly everyone ‒ in Ukraine, in the West, and in Russia ‒ agreed. The Orange Revolution appeared to have changed everything. Soon, it became apparent that a great deal, especially within Ukraine, had not changed. As time went on, moreover, it seemed as if time were moving in reverse, as Viktor Yanukovych, who had seemed to be politically dead in 2004, was again appointed prime minister in 2006. Having failed to steal the presidency in 2004, he won it fairly in 2010. Yushchenko, the hero of 2004, was by 2010 seen as a failure. The turnabout was hard to imagine.

Internationally, things did not go much better. After the Orange Revolution, the European Union committed more fully to engaging Ukraine. First the European Neighborhood Policy and then the proposed Association Agreement showed great potential for Ukraine’s integration with the EU. The European Union also got involved in helping Ukraine resolve its energy conflict with Russia, because the quarrel was directly affecting customers in the EU. Increasingly, however, these initiatives were hampered by Ukraine’s domestic turmoil and were seen as threatening by Russia.

The relationship between the West and Russia, in which Ukraine’s relations with both were embedded, lurched from one crisis to another, despite repeated efforts to rescue it. The Orange Revolution soured EU-Russian relations, but European leaders sought to rebuild them. The new nadir in the West’s relations with Russia was captured by the bitter speech Vladimir Putin gave to the Munich Security Conference in 2007, expressing his resentment over how Russia had been treated by the United States: “One state and, of course, first and foremost the United States, has overstepped its national borders in every way. This is visible in the economic, political, cultural and educational policies it 1 Quoted in Adrian Karatnycky, “Ukraine’s Orange Revolution,” Foreign Affairs 84, 2

