On December 27, 2004, Viktor Yushchenko, in a victory speech, said

“We are free. The old era is over. We are a new country now.”1 Nearly everyone ‒ in Ukraine, in the West, and in Russia ‒ agreed. The Orange Revolution appeared to have changed everything. Soon, it became apparent that a great deal, especially within Ukraine, had not changed. As time went on, moreover, it seemed as if time were moving in reverse, as Viktor Yanukovych, who had seemed to be politically dead in 2004, was again appointed prime minister in 2006. Having failed to steal the presidency in 2004, he won it fairly in 2010. Yushchenko, the hero of 2004, was by 2010 seen as a failure. The turnabout was hard to imagine.

Internationally, things did not go much better. After the Orange Revolution, the European Union committed more fully to engaging Ukraine. First the European Neighborhood Policy and then the proposed Association Agreement showed great potential for Ukraine’s integration with the EU. The European Union also got involved in helping Ukraine resolve its energy conflict with Russia, because the quarrel was directly affecting customers in the EU. Increasingly, however, these initiatives were hampered by Ukraine’s domestic turmoil and were seen as threatening by Russia.

The relationship between the West and Russia, in which Ukraine’s relations with both were embedded, lurched from one crisis to another, despite repeated efforts to rescue it. The Orange Revolution soured EU-Russian relations, but European leaders sought to rebuild them. The new nadir in the West’s relations with Russia was captured by the bitter speech Vladimir Putin gave to the Munich Security Conference in 2007, expressing his resentment over how Russia had been treated by the United States: “One state and, of course, first and foremost the United States, has overstepped its national borders in every way. This is visible in the economic, political, cultural and educational policies it 1 Quoted in Adrian Karatnycky, “Ukraine’s Orange Revolution,” Foreign Affairs 84, 2

(March‒April 2005): 47.

139

140

Reform and Reversal, 2004–2010

imposes on other nations. Well, who likes this? Who is happy about this?”2

The year 2008 saw two pivotal events: the Bucharest NATO summit and Russia’s invasion of Georgia. At the Bucharest summit, NATO

declined to offer Ukraine and Georgia Membership Action Plans, but said that they could eventually join. Depending on one’s view, the decision not to offer a MAP was a concession to Russia’s concerns, or an aggressive move to which it felt compelled to respond. Similarly, whether Georgia’s actions justified it being invaded by Russia was highly debat-able. While both the United States and European Union were appalled by Russia’s actions, both made concrete efforts to put the episode behind them. In pursuing a “reset,” the new Obama administration was accused of appeasement and naivete, and the strategy brought few results.

The themes highlighted in Chapter 1 were all dramatically on view between 2005 and 2010. The security dilemma in central Europe was exemplified by the Bucharest summit: Ukraine and Georgia, fearing Russia, sought a formal alliance with NATO; NATO worried about both those states but also about Russia’s reaction, tried to have it both ways ‒

acceding to Russia’s opposition while reassuring Ukraine and Georgia ‒

but even this was insufficient to assuage Russia’s fears of an intolerable loss.

Mutually incompatible notions of the status quo exacerbated the security dilemma. For Russia, the perception after 2004 that Ukraine had been lost stoked resentment and determination to redress the problem. For the Yushchenko government and those who supported it, the Orange Revolution finally put Ukraine in its proper place, on the road to the West.

Normative disagreements continued to drive the West and Russia apart. The appointment of Dmitri Medvedev as Russian president in 2008 led to hope, both in Russia and the West, of a political liberalization and warming of relations, but there was little progress. Internationally, Russia now explicitly advanced an ideology counter to the West’s uni-versalist liberalism, stressing instead “civilizational pluralism,” and creating institutions to further that agenda.

This nexus between geopolitics and democratization increasingly dominated the relationship. It was central in Russia’s mind and in the mind of the West after the Orange Revolution. Failed protest movements in Uzbekistan and Belarus upped the stakes. While the European Union strongly believed that Ukraine must be free to determine its membership 2 Vladimir Putin, “Speech and the Following Discussion at the Munich Conference on Security Policy,” February 10, 2007, Kremlin website, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/

president/transcripts/24034.

The Collapse of the Orange Coalition

141

in international organizations, Russia saw the EU’s promotion of democracy in Ukraine as a hostile geopolitical move.

For all these reasons, by the time of Yanukovych’s election as president in 2010, tensions within Ukraine and over Ukraine had ratcheted up dramatically. Within Ukraine, regional divides had been reinforced, largely by Yanukovych’s campaign tactics. The collapse of the “Orange Coalition” reopened the door to Yanukovych and to Russian influence and squandered the opportunity to integrate with Europe that the Orange Revolution had opened. This set the stage for Yanukovych’s post-2010 assault on Ukraine’s constitution, laws, and oligarchic pluralism, which increased domestic instability. Internationally, it became increasingly widely accepted that Russia and the West were adversaries and that Ukraine was at the heart of their contest. Even as determined European leaders sought to find common ground with Russia, their policies of broadening democratic integration inevitably threatened Russia’s control over Ukraine.

The Collapse of the Orange Coalition and the

Resurrection of Viktor Yanukovych

Almost immediately after it came to power, the alliance of forces that had prevailed in the Orange Revolution began to come apart. At the heart of the alliance were Yushchenko, leader of the “Nasha Ukraina” (Our Ukraine) bloc, who became president; and Yuliya Tymoshenko, leader of the Batkivshchyna (Fatherland) party, who became prime minister.

The two had worked together under Kuchma when Yushchenko was PM

and Tymoshenko was deputy PM, but then had been on opposite sides when Tymoshenko went into opposition and led the “Ukraine without Kuchma” movement, while Yushchenko crucially stood by Kuchma.

Only in 2004 did they forge an alliance, recognizing that if they both ran for president, Kuchma and Yanukovych could apply divide and conquer tactics to defeat them. Two other actors were also important to the coalition: Oleksandr Moroz, leader of the Socialist Party, broadened the regional and ideological appeal of the anti-Kuchma group, and controlled a large bloc of votes in parliament. The chocolate magnate Petro Poroshenko provided financial support for the Orange Revolution and his Channel 5 was one of very few television networks to support the revolution.

With the election won, however, their rivalry emerged stronger than ever, based on at least three factors. First, the inherent tension in Ukraine’s system, in which the president and prime minister shared control over the executive branch, had been exacerbated by the

142

Reform and Reversal, 2004–2010

constitutional compromise of 2004. Under the new rules, some ministers were appointed by the president and others by the prime minister.

Typical of the new era was when Tymoshenko accused Yushchenko’s close ally Poroshenko, who headed the National Security and Defense Council, of usurping her power, in particular when he went to Moscow to try to reach a deal on gas supplies and pricing with Russia.3

Second, linked to these institutional prerogatives was control over the redistribution of economic assets. The ejection of the Kuchma group after ten years in power was going to lead to a redistribution of economic assets, and everyone wanted their share. Many people around Yushchenko and Tymoshenko sought the financial benefits of their new positions. By many accounts, the demand for bribes did not decrease, and may have increased. In September 2005, Yushchenko’s chief of staff, Oleksandr Zinchenko, resigned saying that “corruption is now even worse than before,” pointing specifically to Poroshenko.4

Third,

the

personal

relationship

between

Yushchenko

and

Tymoshenko deteriorated rapidly. Yushchenko appeared to develop an intense hatred for his former ally, such that he chose to allow Yanukovych to return as PM in 2006 rather than allow her to do so, and then campaigned against her in 2010. Yushchenko’s inability to rein in the corruption all around him and his inability to get along with Tymoshenko help explain how the advantages gained in 2004 were squandered, setting the stage for later conflict.

At the same time, Yanukovych was working to rehabilitate himself. He hired the American political consultant Paul Manafort, who advised him on strategy relating to Ukraine and also began a sophisticated campaign to burnish Yanukovych’s image internationally. Part of that strategy was to stress Yanukovych’s support for European integration.

With Yushchenko and Tymoshenko (and their teams) at barely disguised war with one another, Zinchenko’s corruption accusations prompted Yushchenko to dismiss Tymoshenko as PM in September 2005, after less than nine months in office. Competition then shifted to parliamentary elections held in March 2006. The pro-reform forces that united in 2004 retained separate parties in 2006, competing with each other for centrist votes rather than competing with the Party of Regions in the east. The major results are shown in Table 5.1.

3 Roman Kupchinsky, “Ukraine: Corruption Allegations Abound,” RFE/RL, September 8, 2005. Tymoshenko and Poroshenko appear to have been rivals for influence within the Orange Coalition from the very beginning. Andrew Wilson shows that they were at odds even before Yushchenko was inaugurated. See Andrew Wilson, Ukraine’s Orange Revolution (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006), pp. 159‒161.

4 “Ukraine Leader’s Team ‘Corrupt,’” BBC, September 5, 2005.

The Collapse of the Orange Coalition

143

Table 5.1 2006 parliamentary election results

Party

Vote percentage

Seats (total 450)

Party of Regions

32.1

186

Batkivshchyna

22.3

129

Nasha Ukraina

14.0

81

Socialist Party

5.7

33

Communist Party

3.7

21

Others not winning 3%

24.6

0

These elections, held under a fully proportional system, with a 3 percent threshold, showed the resilience of the Party of Regions. Having supported Kuchma’s Za Yedinu Ukrainu bloc in 2002, the Party of Regions now ran on its own, and finished first, with 32 percent of the vote, winning 186 of 450 seats. The Communist Party was a significant casualty of Regions’ dominance, falling to 3.7 percent, just enough to clear the bar to enter parliament. Yushchenko’s Nasha Ukraina received a strong rebuke, falling to third place behind Tymoshenko’s Batkivshchyna, after having earned three times the percentage of proportional representation vote (and five times as many seats) in 2002.

While the Orange Coalition (Batkivshchyna, Nasha Ukraina, and the Socialists) had enough seats (243) to form a majority, their problem was that Poroshenko and Moroz both wanted to be speaker of the parliament.

When a deal appeared imminent that would have made Poroshenko speaker, Moroz defected and struck a deal instead with his erstwhile enemy, the Party of Regions (as well as the Communist Party).5 In return for their support for him becoming speaker, Moroz and the Socialist Party supported Yanukovych becoming prime minister. Yushchenko and the leaders of all the parliamentary parties except Tymoshenko’s Batkivshchyna signed a “Universal of National Unity,” a sort of grand coalition agreement stating an agreed program, and Yushchenko appointed Yanukovych prime minister. Among the most debated items was that on NATO, on which the parties agreed to “resolution of the issue of joining NATO according to the results of a referendum to be held after Ukraine has implemented all required procedures.”6

The Orange Coalition had been in power, and Yanukovych out of the prime minister’s chair, for roughly seventeen months.

5 Wilson, Ukraine’s Orange Revolution, p. 171, reports that Tymoshenko was also trying to strike a deal with the Party of Regions.

6 “Universal Natsional’noyi Yednosti: Tekst, pidpycanyi na kruglomu stoli,” Ukrayins’ka Pravda, August 3, 2006, www.pravda.com.ua/articles/2006/08/3/3139284/.

144

Reform and Reversal, 2004–2010

Table 5.2 2007 parliamentary election results

Party

Vote percentage

Seats (total 450)

Party of Regions

34.4

175

Batkivshchyna

30.7

156

Nasha Ukraina/People’s Self-Defense

14.2

72

Communist Party

5.4

27

Lytvyn Bloc

4.0

20

Others not winning 3%

11.2

0

“National unity” did not last long. A larger crisis ensued in 2007, after months of fighting between the parliamentary majority joined by the PM

and cabinet against the parliamentary minority joined by the president.

Once the opposition took over parliament, deputies began defecting from pro-Yushchenko parties to the parliamentary majority. This followed a pattern in which deputies bandwagoned to the majority, often enticed by substantial side-payments.7 Under post-2004 legislation, deputies were bound to the parties on whose lists they were elected. Known as the

“imperative mandate,” the measure was designed to prevent this defection.

Batkivshchyna and Nasha Ukraina leaders argued that under this rule, when the deputies left their parties, they surrendered their seats, and that by not expelling them, the parliamentary majority was violating the law.

As the Regions-led coalition neared 300 votes, which would have allowed it to change the constitution to erode further Yushchenko’s power, Yushchenko acted. On April 2, Yushchenko declared the dissolution of the parliament and the holding of new parliamentary elections.

This move kicked off an institutional crisis. The government, controlled by Yanukovych, refused to allocate funds for new elections, and the opposition contested the constitutionality of Yushchenko’s acts. Yushchenko then dismissed three constitutional court judges. With the constitutional court delaying a ruling, the two sides reached a compromise that included new elections. This was another example where an elite bargain trumped strict constitutional procedure.

While the Party of Regions’ and Nasha Ukraina’s performance barely changed, Batkivshchyna improved dramatically, largely at the expense of the Socialist Party and the small parties (see Table 5.2). Moroz’s Socialist Party failed to cross the threshold, as voters punished it for having gone into coalition with Regions. The big winner was Tymoshenko and 7 In 2007, knowledgeable insiders in Kyiv told me that the going price to switch parties was $300,000.

The Collapse of the Orange Coalition

145

Batkivshchyna, which gained almost 8 percent of the vote and twenty-seven seats. As a result, Batkivshchyna and Nasha Ukraina were able to forge a coalition and Tymoshenko was able to reclaim the prime minister’s position. Even then, however, Yushchenko was toying with a “grand coalition” with the Party of Regions. A shadow of this coalition was established in the National Security and Defense Council, where several Party of Regions leaders were appointed.8

The new coalition lasted only until September 2008: Ukraine had yet another political crisis when the parliament, with Batkivshchyna joining with the Party of Regions and Communists, passed a package of laws tweaking the balance of power between the president and prime minister in favor of the PM. Yushchenko’s party responded by withdrawing from the coalition. It appeared that yet another parliamentary election would be held, as Yushchenko could have called fresh elections if a new coalition were not agreed, but in December a new coalition was formed, with the Lytvyn Bloc joining Batkivshchyna and Nasha Ukraina. Tymoshenko remained prime minister and Volodymyr Lytvyn became speaker of parliament, replacing Nasha Ukraina’s Arseniy Yatsenyuk.

In this third crisis, Ukraine’s relations with Russia were directly involved. Yushchenko traveled to Tbilisi to support Georgia, while Tymoshenko criticized Yushchenko for taking sides. Yushchenko’s advisor Andriy Kyslinskyi accused Tymoshenko of seeking Russia’s support in the presidential election, and cited “signs of high treason and political corruption.” It appeared that looking toward the 2010 presidential election, Russia saw Tymoshenko as a good alternative to Yushchenko,

while Tymoshenko saw Russian

support as potentially

valuable. She traveled to Moscow in September 2008 and had cordial and widely publicized meetings with Medvedev, who had replaced Putin as president, and with Putin, who had become prime minister.9

This domestic conflict is crucial to understanding this period for two reasons. First, it shows that contrary to much of the narrative in the West at the time, the Orange Revolution did not decisively defeat Yanukovych and the Party of Regions. They actually tightened their grip over the electorate in eastern Ukraine and always had the largest bloc in parliament. This set the stage for the presidential election of 2010. Second, 8 Taras Kuzio, “The Tymoshenko Government’s Domestic and Foreign Policies: The First 100 Days,” Institute for European, Russian and Eurasian Studies, George Washington University, April 17, 2008, p. 2.

9 Christian Lowe, “Russia Finds Unlikely Ally in Ukraine’s Tymoshenko,” Reuters, October 5, 2008. For a more detailed discussion of Ukrainian leaders’ and parties’

responses to the Georgia war, see Dominique Arel, “Ukraine since the War in Georgia,” Survival 50, 6 (2008): 15‒25.

146

Reform and Reversal, 2004–2010

during a period in which the West was most favorably inclined to increasing integration with Ukraine, Ukraine itself was in chaos. Among other things, this helps explain why many NATO members were unen-thusiastic about a Membership Action Plan in 2008.

Foreign Policy under Yushchenko

Yushchenko was seen in the West as the hero of the Orange Revolution, and in his first weeks in office he traveled extensively and was received very positively. But he ran into the same problem as Kuchma, namely that integrating with the West required not just good intentions, but the execution of far-reaching domestic reform. And the chaos and infighting of Yushchenko’s time in office prevented such reform.

Moreover, it is not clear how hard Yushchenko tried to achieve it. If Kuchma had seen his role as brokering deals among different clans, Yushchenko stepped back from the fray, with the result that the role of the clans actually increased. With Ukraine apparently moving toward parliamentary democracy, the oligarchs put more money and effort into building political parties and they were in a strong position to resist reform. Toward the end of Yushchenko’s term, European Commission President Jose Manuel Barrosso said: “I will speak honestly with you, Mr. President. It often seems to us that commitments on reform are only partly implemented and words are not always accompanied by action.

Reforms are the only way to establish stability, and build closer ties with the EU.”10

Nor was Russia any happier with Yushchenko’s policies. Among other things, Yushchenko insisted that Russia withdraw FSB personnel from its forces in Sevastopol and he made it clear that he had no intention of extending Russia’s lease on the base there.11 In August 2009, President Medvedev sent a letter to Yushchenko summarizing Russia’s complaints about Ukrainian policy, including support for Georgia in the 2008 war, the gas disputes of 2006 and 2009, interference in the Russian Black Sea Fleet, the status of the Russian language in Ukraine, and honoring Nazi collaborators. This letter formed the agenda for Russia’s relationship with Ukraine’s next president, and was widely seen as signaling to the Ukrainian population that a change in direction would be needed for 10 Quoted in Taras Kuzio, “Viktor Yushchenko’s Foreign Policy Agenda,” Eurasia Daily Monitor 6, 230, December 16, 2009.

11 Elizabeth A. Wood, “Introduction,” in Elizabeth A. Wood, William E. Pomeranz, E.

Wayne Merry, and Maxim Trudolyubov, Roots of Russia’s War in Ukraine (Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson Center Press, 2016), pp. 11‒12.

Foreign Policy under Yushchenko

147

relations with Russia to improve.12 While Medvedev was widely seen as comparatively liberal among Russian leaders, the letter adopted many of the policies of Russian conservatives, complaining, for example, that

“Russian-Ukrainian relations are tested by your administration’s review of our general historical framework, glorification of Nazi collaborators, the exaltation of the role of radical nationalists, and attempts to press the international community in supporting nationalist interpretations of the 1932‒1933 famine in the USSR as a ‘genocide against the Ukrainian people.’” Referring to those in Ukraine who supported joining NATO, Medvedev said: “The ‘argument’ they use alludes to a ‘Russian threat’ to the security of Ukraine, which as you well know does not and cannot exist,” and he reiterated the view that “[f]or centuries Russians and Ukrainians have been and remain not just neighbors but brothers who will always hold the best feelings; who share a common history, culture, and religion; and who are united by close economic cooperation, strong kinship, and human relations.” It is notable that Medvedev presented these assertions not as hopes or aspirations but as facts. “I would like to inform you that because of anti-Russian Ukrainian government policies we have decided to postpone the appointment of our new ambassador.

The specific date [of his appointment] will be determined later when there are genuine improvements in Russian-Ukrainian relations.” The letter concluded with a reference to the upcoming elections: “Russia hopes that the new political leadership of Ukraine will be ready to build a relationship between our countries that will actually meet the genuine aspirations of our peoples and that this will be in the interests of strengthening European security.”13

While Yushchenko was widely seen as a pro-western candidate (and compared to Yanukovych, he was), he was also a pragmatist, and sought to build a constructive relationship with Russia. At the same time, Russia, having bungled its attempt to help get Yanukovych elected, sought to gradually rebuild its position in Ukraine. With the Party of Regions controlling the Donbas and a large bloc in parliament, and with various Ukrainian oligarchs having interests that overlapped with Russia, its position in Ukraine was far from hopeless.

12 Eugene B. Rumer and David J. Kramer, “Medvedev’s Message,” New York Times, August 20, 2009. Rumer and Kramer wondered whether “Russia is preparing to take drastic action ‒ to reclaim the Crimean peninsula for example, with its ethnic Russian majority?”

13 The text of Medvedev’s letter is printed in English in Taras Kuzio, Ukraine: Democratization, Corruption and the New Russian Imperialism (Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger, 2015), pp. 438‒439. The Russian original is at Poslaniye Presidentu Ukrainy Viktoru Yushchenko,” August 11, 2009, Kremlin website.

148

Reform and Reversal, 2004–2010

Russia Responds to the Orange Revolution

Immediately following the Orange Revolution, in early 2005, Putin was confronted by street protests of his own. The immediate cause was a reform of social payments that replaced Soviet-era pension benefits such as free public transportation and subsidized utilities with cash payments that many considered insufficient. While the protests did not aim to oust Putin, they criticized him directly.14 He responded by increasing the cash payments dramatically. The protests seemed to some to bear out predictions in Kommersant that “the Orange Revolution virus will now spread to Russia … It will not take long to dismantle the new Russian totalitarianism.”15 The “Tulip Revolution” that deposed Askar Akayev, the long-time ruler of Kyrgyzstan in March 2005, highlighted the threat, as did protests in Andijan, Uzbekistan, that were violently suppressed in May 2005.

The Russian government adopted a set of strategies intended to ensure that such a revolution could not happen in Russia or in other states in the region.16 In February 2005, Defense Minister Sergei Ivanov criticized

“exports of revolutions to the CIS states, no matter what color ‒ pink, blue, you name it,” continuing the Russian notions that these protests were exports rather than indigenous.17 The following year, he argued that the military “should also be prepared for the possibility of coup d’états in some post-Soviet states and destabilization on the borders that may stem from these attempts.”18 Similarly, Vladislav Surkov, the deputy head of the presidential administration, listing the threats to Russian sovereignty, included “a gentle absorption using the modern ‘orange technologies’ in conditions of a weakened national immunity to outside influence.” “We know how this is done: values are undermined, the state 14 Claire Bigg, “Protests across Russia Force Putin to Double Increase in Pension Payments,” The Guardian, January 19, 2005.

15 Quoted in Steven Eke, “Russians Rush to Rethink Ukraine,” BBC News, December 27, 2004.

16 See Thomas Ambrosio, “Insulating Russia from a Colour Revolution: How the Kremlin Resists Regional Democratic Trends,” Democratization 14, 2 (April 2007): 232‒252; Vitali Silitski, “Contagion Deterred: Preemptive Authoritarianism in the Former Soviet Union (the Case of Belarus),” in Valerie J. Bunce, Michael McFaul, and Kathryn Stoner-Weiss, eds., Democracy and Authoritarianism in the Post-Communist World (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010), pp. 274‒299; and Jeanne L. Wilson, “The Legacy of the Color Revolutions for Russian Politics and Foreign Policy,” Problems of Post-Communism 57, 2 (March/April 2010): 21–36.

17 Council on Foreign Relations, “The World in the 21st Century: Addressing New Threats and Challenges,” January 13, 2005, www.cfr.org/event/world-21st-century-

addressing-new-threats-and-challenges.

18 Sergei Ivanov, “Russia Must Be Strong,” Defense and Security, January 13, 2006.

Russia Responds to the Orange Revolution 149

is declared inefficient and domestic conflicts are provoked … if they succeed in four countries why not to do the same in a fifth.”19

Surkov advocated “the formation of a nationally orientated stratum of society,” and the formation of the youth group Nashi (Ours) was one way to do this. In May 2005, Nashi deployed 50,000 people to a demonstration in support of Putin in Moscow, and Gleb Pavlovskii, at a Nashi gathering later that year, was explicit about its role: “A revolution is a coup. They [the United States] have tried it before, and soon they will try it here, perhaps as early as the Moscow Duma elections this autumn.

Your job is to defend the constitutional order if and when the coup comes.”20 “If there is an attempt to topple Putin, Nashi should go into the streets and prevent a coup.”21 The creation of Nashi was intended to counter the role of youth groups such as Pora in the Orange Revolution and Otpor in Serbia.

A related tactic to prevent political unrest was to undermine the NGOs that were implicated in organizing it. A 2006 law made it legal to deny registration to any group whose “goals and objectives … create a threat to the sovereignty, political independence, territorial integrity, national unity, unique character, cultural heritage, and national interests of the Russian Federation,” and prohibited foreign NGOs from transferring funds to their Russian branches.22 The first requirement gave the government latitude to shutter NGOs it considered oppositional; the second undermined the financial basis for many NGOs.

The Russian government also came to reject the western practice of providing election monitors to assess the fairness of voting in new democracies. While the discovery of fraud in Ukraine’s 2004 election was primarily the work of domestic Ukrainian actors, the role of external monitors in declaring the second round unfair, and the rerun fair, fit into the Russian narrative of western interference. Sergei Lavrov said

“Election monitoring is not only ceasing to make sense, but is also becoming an instrument of political manipulation and a destabilizing factor.”23 In Russia’s own parliamentary elections, in 2007, the 19 “Putin’s Aide on Main Threats to Russia’s Sovereignty,” BBC Monitoring Former Soviet Union, March 4, 2006.

20 Julia Evans, “How Putin Youth is Indoctrinated to Foil Revolution,” The Times, July 18, 2005.

21 “Counter-Revolution and Fun at Pro-Putin Youth Summer Camp,” Agence France Presse, July 19, 2005.

22 Freedom House, “Factsheet: Russia’s NGO Laws” (no date). The 2006 laws were relaxed under Medvedev in 2009, and a stricter version was implemented under Putin in 2012.

23 Quoted in C. J. Chivers, “Russia Proposes Steps to Weaken Election Watchdogs,” The New York Times, October 25, 2007, p. A14.

150

Reform and Reversal, 2004–2010

government sharply constrained the number of OSCE observers and their latitude, and as a result the OSCE’s Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights declined to participate.

A fourth tactic to head off the transnational spread of democracy was to counter it with transnational promotion of autocracy. Russia pursued this both bilaterally, in support for various leaders in the region against democratic opposition, and also multilaterally, in the formation of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization along with China and several of the Central Asian states. Originally focused on border security, the organization increasingly came to focus on preventing domestic political turmoil, and promoting the norm of respect for different systems of government.24

In the short term, these events did not have a direct bearing on Russia’s relations with the West or with Ukraine, but they had important implications for the future. They demonstrated how vulnerable Russian leaders felt to such a revolution and how clearly they attributed events in Ukraine to external manipulation. This meant that Russia could foment protests and counterprotests just as easily. The NGO laws furthered fear of the West as a means of consolidating autocratic rule in Russia. That further contributed to the view that Russia’s prickliness on various issues was intended for domestic consumption, and need not be seen as truly representing Russia’s foreign policy views.

Ukraine and the EU

Membership in the European Union was Ukraine’s stated goal under Kuchma, and many perceived the potential to make dramatic progress with the change in leadership. In January 2005, speaking to the Council of Europe in Strasbourg, Yushchenko stressed the goal of membership and promised that his government would be “reorganized to add a real, rather than rhetorical, dimension and content to the process of integration into the European Union.”25 He created a new position, a deputy prime minister for European integration, and put his close ally Oleh Rybachuk in the position. But while the EU foreign policy head Javier Solana said that Yushchenko’s administration “opens up new possibilities,” and that “we must find the right actions to support this choice,”

the European Union demurred, as some members were hesitant.26

24 The role of the SCO in combating the spread of democracy and in providing international organizations with a distinct narrative about domestic governance is discussed

in

Paul

D’Anieri, “Autocratic Diffusion and the Pluralization of

Democracy,” in Bruce Jentleson and Louis Pauly, eds., Power in a Complex Global System (London: Routledge, 2014), pp. 80‒96.

25 BBC, January 25, 2005.

26 Ibid.

Ukraine and the EU

151

The EU/Ukraine Action Plan of 2005 stated that “The European Union and Ukraine are determined to enhance their relations and to promote stability, security and well-being. The approach is founded on shared values, joint ownership and differentiation. It will contribute to the further stepping up of our strategic partnership.”27 But it made no mention of membership. Among the potential complications was that, while EU policy said that any European state was eligible for membership, it had not been determined whether Ukraine was a “European state.”28

Thus the European Union and Ukraine were again caught in a familiar vicious circle: Ukraine said that it could not generate the sacrifices needed for far-reaching reform if membership were not promised in return, and the European Union could not make a membership commitment to a country that needed so much reform. On top of that dynamic, both sides had their own internal limits on the relationship: in Ukraine there were powerful interests that did not want EU-style reform, and it was not clear voters would support the actions needed even if membership were on offer. For the EU, “enlargement fatigue,” Ukraine’s very large size, and the Russian concerns also promoted hesitation in some states.

Yushchenko’s team expected that it would fare much better than Kuchma had, and in 2005 he requested that the European Union begin negotiations on an Association Agreement and a “membership perspective.”29 The European Union was divided, however. While new members in central Europe, led by Poland, sought to move quickly on Ukraine (as they did with NATO), others were more cautious, reflecting both the traditional incremental methods of the European Union and the concerns noted above. While the European Union as a whole could not agree on a policy change, the bureaucrats could, and so a February 2005

“Action Plan” under the European Neighborhood Policy envisioned a new “enhanced” agreement, once the “Action Plan” was complete.30

Progress was very slow, however, in part due to Ukraine’s domestic chaos, and in part because Ukraine was focused on completing accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO). After several years of negotiations, Ukraine finally joined the WTO in January 2008. In addition to providing Ukraine increased access to world markets and making Ukraine’s markets more open, the accession was significant because 27 “EU/Ukraine

Action

Plan,”

2005,

EU

Neighbours

Library,

https://

library.euneighbours.eu//content/eu-ukraine-action-plan-0.

28 RFE/RL, “EU: Updated ‘Action Plan’ for Ukraine Wards off Talk of Membership,”

January 24, 2005.

29 Rilka Dragneva-Lewers and Kataryna Wolczuk, Ukraine between the EU and Russia: The Integration Challenge (Basingstoke, Hampshire: Palgrave MacMillan, 2015), p. 41.

30 Ibid., p. 42.

152

Reform and Reversal, 2004–2010

Ukraine joined before Russia. Russia opposed Ukraine joining first and, as a member, Ukraine would, at least in principle, be in a position to veto Russia’s membership.31 While that was unlikely, it might provide Ukraine a bit of leverage, and the symbolism of Ukraine joining first was significant. Yushchenko promised to “fully support” Russia’s accession.32

Yanukovych’s return to the role of prime minister in 2006 diminished the government’s focus on EU integration. Speaking ahead of a visit to Brussels in September 2006, Yanukovych advocated more balance in relations with Europe and Russia, criticizing what he called “Euro-romanticism,” and saying that “[w]e must not allow the imbalances that arose in the past year-and-a-half to continue.”33 He said that while he supported

integration

with

the

EU,

“we are closer to Euro-

pragmatism.”34

In early 2007, the European Council adopted “negotiating directives for a new enhanced agreement between the European Union and Ukraine.” The document stated that “through this [as yet not negotiated]

agreement, the European Union aims to build an increasingly close relationship with Ukraine, aimed at gradual economic integration and deepening of political cooperation,” but also that “a new enhanced agreement shall not prejudge any possible future developments in EU-Ukraine relations.”35 An Association Agreement, let alone membership, was not on the agenda.

It was not until the European Union established the Eastern Partnership in 2009 that progress on Ukraine-EU integration began to pick up speed again. The Eastern Partnership was proposed by Poland with support from Sweden.

The Eastern Partnership will bring about a significant strengthening of EU policy with regard to its Eastern partners by seeking to create the necessary conditions for political association and further economic integration between the European Union and its Eastern partners through the development of a specific Eastern dimension of the European Neighborhood Policy. To achieve this, the Eastern 31 “Ukraine, Georgia May Put Forward New Demands to Russia in WTO Accession Process ‒ Shokhin,” Ukraine Business Weekly, February 6, 2008.

32 “Ukraine to Give Full Support to Russia’s Accession to WTO, Yushchenko Says,”

Ukraine Business Weekly, February 11, 2008.

33 “Ukraine’s PM Speaks against ‘Euro-romanticism’ ahead of Visit to Brussels,” BBC

Monitoring Kiev Unit, September 13, 2006.

34 “PM: Ukraine to Stay on European Course,” Interfax Russia & CIS General Newswire, September 6, 2006.

35 Council of the European Union, Press Release 5463/07, 2776th Council Meeting, General Affairs and External Relations, External Relations, Brussels, January 22, 2007.

Ukraine and the EU

153

Partnership seeks to support political and socio-economic reforms, facilitating approximation and convergence towards the European Union.36

The documents stressed that “[s]hared values including democracy, the rule of law, and respect for human rights will be at its core, as well as the principles of market economy, sustainable development and good governance.”37 Crucially for Ukraine, the policy envisioned that “cooperation under the Eastern Partnership should provide the foundation for new Association Agreements between the European Union and those partners who have made sufficient progress.”38 At the same time, Ukraine was not thrilled to be included in the same category as the Caucasian states, which clearly would not be candidates for EU membership in the foreseeable future.

At the time, there was speculation that the goals were geopolitical as well as normative. The European Council said at the time that “Promoting stability, good governance and economic development in its Eastern neighborhood is of strategic importance for the European Union.”39

Moreover, the inclusion of Belarus, which under Lukashenka had done little to earn a deeper relationship with the EU, led to speculation that the European Union was seeking to provide a long-term alternative to Russia for Belarus.40 Belarus’s decision to participate in the Eastern Partnership sparked a quarrel with Russia, and it appeared that Russia was much more concerned about Belarus’s participation than Ukraine’s, because its economic integration and political domination of Belarus were much greater.

Russia perceived that the Eastern Partnership would likely injure its interests, and thought that it may have been designed to do so. President Dmitri Medvedev said that “Any partnership is better than conflict, but it is confusing for us that some states attempt to use the structure as a partnership against Russia.”41 Andrei Zagorski wrote that “The upgraded ambition of the EaP [Eastern Partnership] to offer Eastern neighbors an association with the EU, instead of an enhanced partnership and cooperation framework, is seen as aiming at and eventually 36 Council of the European Union, “Declaration by the European Council on the Eastern Partnership,” Annex 2, Press Release 5463/07, 2776th Council Meeting, General Affairs and External Relations, External Relations, Brussels, January 22, 2009, p. 19.

37 Ibid., p. 19.

38 Ibid., p. 20.

39 Council of the European Union, “Presidency Conclusions – Brussels, 19/20 March 2009,” 7880/1/09, April 29, 2009, p. 11.

40 Andrew Rettman, “Values to Form Core of EU ‘Eastern Partnership,’” EU Observer, March 18, 2009.

41 Sergey Tumanov, Alexander Gasparishvili, and Ekaterina Romanova, “Russia-EU

Relations, or How the Russians Really View the EU,” Journal of Communist Studies and Transition Politics 27, 1 (March 2011): 131.

154

Reform and Reversal, 2004–2010

leading towards a progressive disassociation of those countries from the Russian Federation.”42 A group of Russian scholars evaluated the situation similarly: “While there is little discrimination in the political dis-course of Russian elites in relation to the European Neighborhood Policy (ENP), in reality, as popular opinion indicates, those neighbors who openly show their allegiances to the European Union – Ukraine, Georgia and Moldova – have been increasingly categorized as hostile and unfriendly towards Russia.”43 Deeper integration between the European Union and the “neighbors” was expected to create new barriers to trade between the neighbors and Russia, and some noted that the adoption of the acquis communautaire had compelled the members added in 2004 to annul existing agreements with Russia, damaging several sectors of Russia’s economy.44 However, there was a basic obstacle to the deeper EU-Russia economic integration that Russia wanted: The European Union had no intention of modifying the acquis to suit Russia, and Russia had no intention of adopting European legal and economic norms.

Zagorski said Russia was concerned that the trade elements of the deal would interfere with Russia’s own aspirations for trade with the states involved. He was particularly worried that integration of Ukraine’s energy sector into the EU’s would interfere with Russia’s plans, and perceived (correctly, it seems) that any liberalization of mobility between the Partnership states and the European Union would complicate efforts to increase freedom of movement between those states and Russia. The consolation, Zagorski said, was that those potential consequences were far down the road, and it did not seem likely that the plan’s aspirations would be achieved.45 Medvedev himself said: “I see nothing miraculous about this Eastern Partnership and, frankly speaking, I do not see any advantage of it at all, and this is confirmed by all the participants of this project that I have spoken to. But I see nothing about it that is aimed directly against Russia.”46 The fact that only one major EU head of state

‒ Germany’s Angela Merkel ‒ attended the kickoff in May 2009 was seen as a sign that the policy was not an EU focus.47 At the same time, Russia 42 Andrei Zagorski, “Eastern Partnership from the Russian Perspective,” International Politics and Society 3 (2011): 41.

43 Tumanov et al., “Russia-EU Relations.”

44 Ibid.

45 Zagorski, “Eastern Partnership from the Russian Perspective,” pp. 41‒44.

46 “Kremlin website transcript of Medvedev interview with Belarusian media,” BBC

Monitoring Former Soviet Union, November 27, 2009.

47 Nico Popescu and Andrew Wilson, “The Limits of Enlargement-Lite: European and Russian Power in the Troubled Neighborhood” (London: European Council on Foreign Relations, 2009), p. 2.

Energy Politics

155

held open the possibility that it would participate in at least some of the Partnership’s projects.48

Nor was Russia standing still: “[W]hile Europe has largely been content to sit back and rely on the ‘magnetism’ of its model, Russia has been quietly working to boost its own attractiveness in the neighborhood, and in particular has learned the power of incentives. While the EU frustrates neighbourhood governments with its bureaucracy, Russia offers straightforward benefits such as visa-free travel and cheap energy.”49 Moreover, Russia had managed to maintain a military presence in each of the six

“Partnership” participants.50

Energy Politics

Energy relations, long an avenue for Russian influence over Ukraine, evolved dramatically, as the shaky truce that existed prior to the Orange Revolution was shattered. With Ukraine having apparently turned its back on Russia, Russia was no longer willing to underprice gas or to tolerate non-payment.51 Fearing potential for contagion of “colored revolutions,” Russia wanted to send a signal to others that the price for bucking Russia would be high. Moreover, with world prices rising, the cost of subsidies to favored consumers was increasing, so Russia aimed to move all pricing to European levels by 2011.52 Ultimately, Russia’s change in policy helped draw the European Union further into RussiaUkraine relations, because the 2006 and 2009 Russia-Ukraine “gas wars”

led to cuts in gas deliveries to the EU. This prompted the European Union to get directly involved, which it had generally not done previously.

With the sector in flux, Russia sought both to reduce or end its subsidies and to ensure that the reorganization served its interests.53

Almost immediately after Yushchenko came to power, in January 2005, 48 “Russia Could Join EU Eastern Partnership: Lavrov,” Agence France Presse, November 25, 2009.

49 Popescu and Wilson, “The Limits of Enlargement-Lite,” p. 3.

50 Ibid., p. 4.

51 As Robert Orttung and Indra Overland point out, the period after the Orange Revolution was a rare instance when Russia’s strategic and economic interests overlapped, see

“A Limited Toolbox: Explaining the Constraints on Russia’s Foreign Energy Policy,”

Journal of Eurasian Studies 2 (2011): 75, 82.

52 Ibid., pp. 78‒79; Rawi Abdelal, “The Profits of Power: Commerce and Realpolitik in Eurasia,” Review of International Political Economy 20, 3 (2013): 433. Abdelal stresses that this was a major revision in Russian policy: rather than ordering Gazprom to offer subsidies for political purposes, the government was now telling it to make as much money as possible.

53 Simon Pirani, “Ukraine’s Gas Sector,” Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, June 2007, p. 23.

156

Reform and Reversal, 2004–2010

Russia complained that Ukraine was once again not paying for its gas supplies, and that it was diverting gas from the pipelines supplying western Europe. It then announced that it would begin charging Ukraine the market price, or $230 per thousand cubic meters.54 Yushchenko agreed to pay the increased price but insisted that the increase take place gradually, and he increased the price for transporting Russian gas to Europe and shifted it from barter to a cash basis. As before, Russia sought control of the pipelines as a way of paying for its supply of gas to Ukraine. Meanwhile, Tymoshenko sought to eliminate the use of the intermediary firm RosUkrEnergo, and the Security Service of Ukraine (SBU), led by Tymoshenko ally Oleksandr Turchynov, began investigating the firm. “By July 2005, virtually all elements of the Russian-Ukrainian gas relationship ‒ most of which had seemed to be settled a year earlier ‒ had been reopened with little sign of resolution.”55 The two sides traded accusations throughout 2005 until, on January 1, 2006, Russia reduced shipments to Ukraine, providing only the amount that it had agreed to sell onwards to western Europe.

The immediate effect was a reduction of supplies to Europe. While Ukraine could have continued shipping gas westward while depriving its own customers, it reduced both the domestic supply and transshipment.

By January 2, Hungary’s supply was down by 40 percent, France’s, Austria’s, and Slovakia’s by 30 percent, and Italy’s by 24 percent.56

The biggest impact was on Slovakia, which got all of its gas from Russia and saw its supply drop 30 percent. The perception was that the cutoff was intended to undermine Ukraine’s new government, and so blame for the crisis was placed on Russia.57 The French newspaper Le Monde stated that “Russia has just pressed the energy button,” and that “the first war of the 21st Century has been declared,” and much of the European press responded similarly.58 Both EU Foreign Policy Chief Javier Solana and German Economics Minister Michael Glos urged 54 It is impossible to know exactly how much Russia was subsidizing gas shipments to Ukraine, because these deals were wrapped up in larger barter deals involving Ukraine’s transportation and storage of gas heading west. The absence of price transparency was clearly a feature rather than a bug, because it facilitated rent-seeking. See ibid., p. 24.

55 Jonathan Stern, “The Russian-Ukrainian Gas Crisis of January 2006,” Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, January 2006, www.oxfordenergy.org/wpcms/wp-content/uploads/

2011/01/Jan2006-RussiaUkraineGasCrisis-JonathanStern.pdf, p. 6.

56 Abdelal, “The Profits of Power,” p. 432.

57 Orttung and Overland, “A Limited Toolbox,” p. 83. Even if Russia were not supplying Ukraine, Ukraine should have been able to ship Russian gas through pipelines to customers in the west. Ukraine’s claims that it had the contractual right to take some of the gas were not convincing.

58 Le Monde and other European papers are quoted in “Press Shivers from Gas Woes,”

BBC, January 3, 2006. See also Abdelal, “The Profits of Power,” p. 432.

Energy Politics

157

Russia to resume supplies to Ukraine, rather than focusing on Ukraine’s role.59 On January 4, the relevant Ukrainian and Russian firms, Naftohaz Ukrainy and Gazprom, announced a new deal, and the supply of gas resumed. The complicated new agreement raised prices both for Russian gas and for transit through Ukraine, but still not to market levels. After another supply disruption later the same month (blamed on very cold weather in Russia) Hungary sponsored a meeting of seven central European countries to discuss how to reduce dependence on Russian gas.60

This was clearly not what Russia had intended. While Russia had immense leverage over Ukraine and Europe, the dependence was mutual: Gazprom accounted for 12‒13 percent of the Russian government’s revenue and 8 percent of Russia’s GDP,61 and almost all of this came from payments from Europe rather than the former Soviet Union.

Therefore, for economic as well as political reasons, Russia did not want to alienate its customers in western Europe or push them to seek alternate supplies, which would reduce both its bargaining power and its revenues.

The result of this episode was a new resolve in the European Union to find ways to stabilize their supply of gas. As Rawi Abdelal has shown, there were two kinds of tensions within the European Union over policy toward gas supplies from Russia. At the core was a tension between the distinct goals of large energy firms, including Germany’s E.ON, France’s EDF, and Italy’s Eni, which focused on buying gas as cheaply as possible, and the goals of states, which were, at least to some extent, willing to incur higher costs in order to reduce dependence on Russia.62 This disagreement was connected to the broader difference on Russia policy between the older, larger EU members further to the west, and the newer members closer to Russia, who sought greater unity in facing what they saw as a significant threat. Commercial interests and geopolitical interests overlapped, and in Abdelal’s view, “a handful of French, German, and Italian corporations somehow [have] taken responsibility for formu-lating the energy strategy – and thus the Russia policy – for essentially all of Europe.”63

The 2006 crisis increased the will of the states to take more control of the policy. One way to do this was to get more deeply involved in 59 Andrew E. Kramer, “Russia Restores Most of Gas Cut to Ukraine Line,” New York Times, January 3, 2006, p. A1. Gazprom’s contracts with customers to the west of Ukraine were priced in terms of supply to the Ukraine-EU border, obligating Russia to get it there. This gave Ukraine a lot of power.

60 Neil Buckley, “Europe Seeks to Cut Reliance on Russia Gas Supply,” Financial Times, January 20, 2006, p. 10.

61 Abdelal, “The Profits of Power,” p. 434.

62 Ibid.

63 Ibid., p. 422.

158

Reform and Reversal, 2004–2010

Russian-Ukrainian relations to prevent further such crises. A second was to diversify supplies. A third was to diversify transit routes to take Ukraine out of the equation. This third goal served Russia’s interest as well, as it would then allow Russia to cut off supplies from Ukraine without cutting off Europe, removing much of Ukraine’s leverage. The means to do this was the Nord Stream project. Nord Stream succeeded in large part because it suited the interests of Europe’s large energy firms, which had deep relationships with Gazprom and its predecessor in the Soviet era.64

Nord Stream was also, however, an early example of Russia’s ability to gain influence among leading western politicians. Germany’s chancellor from 1998 to 2005, Gerhard Schroeder, was a strong advocate of Nord Stream. Two weeks before leaving office, he signed the deal with Russia to build the pipeline, which, by going under the Baltic Sea, would avoid any transit countries between Russia and Germany. The deal was seen as undermining the positions of Ukraine, Poland, and the Baltics, all of which objected. Just after leaving the chancellor’s office, Schroeder took a lucrative position with the Nord Stream consortium, and in 2017 he became a director of the Russian government-controlled oil firm Ros-Neft, which was under US sanctions.65

In the West, there was a debate among those who saw Gazprom as a

“normal” company, pursuing profits and insisting that bills be paid, that just happened to be controlled by the Russian government, versus those who saw it as an arm of the Russian government, pursuing the foreign policy aims of the state. Put differently, there was a clash between the commercial logic of firms, for which eliminating Ukraine from the equation was highly valuable, and the political logic of states, which saw cutting Ukraine out as deeply damaging to its independence. In April 2006, Radoslaw Sikorski, the Polish Minister of Defense, called Nord Stream the “Molotov-Ribbentrop pipeline.”66 South Stream, an analogous project to circumvent Ukraine by piping gas under the Black Sea and through the Balkans to Italy, moved more slowly and was finally abandoned after the adoption of economic sanctions in 2014. Ultimately, the European Union pursued a mixed strategy. In the short term, 64 Ibid., p. 437.

65 Rick Loack, “He Used to Rule Germany: Now, He Oversees Russian Energy Companies and Lashes Out at the U.S.,” Washington Post, August 12, 2017. On Schroeder and Nord Stream (and Nord Stream 2), see Judy Dempsey, “The (German) Politics of Nord Stream 2,” Carnegie Europe, November 3, 2016; and Andrey Gurkov and Markian Ostaptschuk, “Nord Stream: A Commercial Project with a Political Vision,” Deutsche Welle, July 7, 2011.

66 Quoted in Abdelal, “The Profits of Power,” p. 441.

Energy Politics

159

recognizing that Russia would be an important source of supply, individual EU states and firms pursued strategies to secure their supplies and the European Union as a whole sought to use diplomacy to broker a truce between Russia and Ukraine that would secure European supplies without forcing Ukraine under Russia’s thumb. In the longer term, moves were made both to diversify supplies from Russia and to find transit routes around Ukraine, such as Nord Stream. The fundamental problem for Ukraine, and for European strategy, is that the cheapest source of gas is Russia, and the most reliable way to get it would be to eliminate Ukraine as a transit country.

In 2007, Ukraine passed a law prohibiting the sale of Ukraine’s gas transport system, which Russia had repeatedly sought in return for below-market gas prices.67 But Ukraine continued to struggle to pay for the gas it received, and several times fell behind on payments. In 2008, a new agreement between prime ministers Tymoshenko and Putin raised prices further (though still well below the price western countries paid) and set prices through 2010.68

A second gas crisis emerged in 2009, and this one was more bitter and had more far-reaching consequences. The crisis emerged in part because rising energy prices increased everyone’s incentives to control the trade, and in part because Ukraine’s domestic political turmoil undermined the ability to forge a durable deal among competing oligarchs and politicians.

As previously, the immediate cause of the shutoff was Ukraine’s failure to pay for the gas it had received. On January 1, Russia again reduced the supply of gas to the Ukrainian pipeline to the level of what was to be shipped onward to the West. Again the supply of gas to customers in the European Union dropped, and again Russia and Ukraine blamed each other. On January 7, Russia went further, completely stopping the flow of gas into Ukraine.

The dispute was finally ended in late January by a deal Tymoshenko made with Russian leaders under which Ukraine would move toward European prices for gas. Among the perceived benefits of the deal for Ukraine was that it did away with intermediaries such as RosUkrEnergo, which were largely vehicles for stealing money from the state budget.69

Narrowing the gap between the Ukrainian and European prices was intended to reduce the scope for corruption. Tymoshenko’s rivals (Yushchenko and Yanukovych) sharply criticized the deal, and Yanukovych 67 Dominic Fean, “A Return to Multi-Vectoral Balancing? Viktor Yanukovych’s Government and Ukrainian Foreign Policy,” Politique étrangère 2 (Summer 2010): 5.

68 Abdelal, “The Profits of Power,” p. 434.

69 Fean, “A Return to Multi-Vectoral Balancing?” p. 4.

160

Reform and Reversal, 2004–2010

later used the deal as a pretext to imprison Tymoshenko on abuse-of-power charges (though he did not cancel the agreement). The deal included three provisions that were seen as highly unfavorable to Ukraine: a pricing formula that would actually have Ukraine pay more than other countries, a “take or pay clause” that required Ukraine to pay for certain levels (more than it needed) whether it consumed the gas or not, and a ban on reexporting gas to other countries. All three of these provisions were eventually thrown out by an international arbitration court in 2017.70

Later in 2009, Ukraine and the European Union reached an agreement to modernize the Ukrainian gas-transit system. The agreement

“recognize[d] the importance of the further expansion and modernization of Ukraine’s gas transit system as an indispensable pillar of the common European energy infrastructure, and the fact that Ukraine is a strategic partner for the EU gas sector.”71 Russia was not included in the agreement, and this was seen in Russia as undermining Russian-Ukrainian collaboration.72 From the EU perspective, this was necessary to achieve better security of the supply to Europe, but Russia saw it as injuring Gazprom73 and Russia’s influence over Ukraine. While Ukraine had survived another crisis, it had also burned a lot of political capital in the EU. Frederick Reinfeldt of Sweden, the EU president in late 2009, said that “patience was lost” in this latest gas dispute.74

The West, Russia, and Ukraine

Under Kuchma, the long-stated goal of joining NATO had been abandoned in mid-2004. Yushchenko reinstated the goal of NATO membership in April 2005, and sought a “Membership Action Plan” (MAP) from NATO. In the coming months and years, extensive attention was given, both rhetorically and institutionally, to preparing Ukraine for possible membership. Under a 2007 Defense “White Book,” Ukraine’s armed forces stated a priority of gearing their modernization toward

“European and NATO armed forces standards.”75

70 Anders Åslund, “Ukraine Beats Russia in Epic Gas Battle,” Atlantic Council, June 1, 2017.

71 “Joint Declaration Signed on Modernization of Ukrainian Gas,” Russia & CIS Business

& Investment Weekly, March 27, 2009.

72 Tumanov et al., “Russia-EU Relations,” p. 126.

73 Ibid., p. 126.

74 Volodymyr Yermolenko, “Mutual Distrust Blurs EU-Summit,” euobserver.com, December 7, 2009.

75 Marten Malek, “The ‘Western Vector’ of the Foreign and Security Policy of Ukraine,”

Journal of Slavic Military Studies 22, 4 (2009): 528.

The Bucharest Summit

161

In pursuing a NATO Membership Action Plan, Yushchenko was not only ahead of most NATO members. He was also ahead of the Ukrainian electorate. Support for NATO membership consistently received minority support in public opinion polls, even after a 2008 public relations campaign in favor of it.76 When Prime Minister Yanukovych, visiting Brussels in 2006, said that “the Ukrainian people are not ready to consider possible membership” in NATO, he was probably closer to the truth than was Yushchenko.77 Yushchenko himself was in no doubt about NATO, saying later, even after a MAP was denied, that Ukraine

“has to move towards the NATO alliance. […] It is the only way for our country to protect our national security and sovereignty. […] I want to remind all political forces in our country that shout about the possible neutral status of Ukraine that neutrality can come at a very high price.”78

The Party of Regions insisted that Ukraine not join NATO without a referendum on the issue, and Yushchenko agreed to this in signing the

“Universal of National Unity” sealing the coalition agreement that brought Yanukovych back to the prime minister’s job in 2006.79

A referendum was part of Tymoshenko’s platform in 2008, and was required by a law passed by parliament that year.80 While Yushchenko and other supporters of NATO membership believed they could build the needed support over time, polling data showed that they had a long way to go, and opponents would never have insisted on the referendum if they were not confident that it would not succeed. In that respect, the hesitation of the existing alliance members was only one major obstacle to membership; Ukraine’s inability to achieve the required reforms was a second, and political opposition within Ukraine was a third.

The Bucharest Summit

In January 2008, Yushchenko, along with PM Tymoshenko and parliament head Arseniy Yatsenyuk, sent a letter to NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer formally requesting that Ukraine be given a Membership Action Plan at the summit scheduled for April in Budapest.

In contrast to other cases where the West or Russia seemed to force Ukraine to make a choice it did not want to make, in this case Ukraine was forcing NATO members to make a choice they did not want to make: many were not ready to seriously contemplate Ukraine’s membership, but they also wanted to support Yushchenko and signal NATO’s 76 Ibid., p. 520.

77 Quoted in ibid., pp. 530‒531.

78 August 23, 2008, quoted in ibid., p. 521.

79 Ibid., p. 533.

80 Ibid., pp. 534‒535.

162

Reform and Reversal, 2004–2010

support for Ukraine’s and Georgia’s independence. The immediate response from US Defense Secretary Robert Gates was that Ukraine’s membership in the alliance was not on the agenda, but there was disagreement within the Bush administration, with Vice President Dick Cheney an especially strong supporter of Ukraine. By March, the United States was supporting a MAP for Ukraine and Georgia. Just before the summit, Bush said: “NATO membership must remain open to all of Europe’s democracies that seek it and are ready to share in the responsibilities of NATO membership.”81 Unusually, the issue was actually resolved at the summit, because the members could not agree in advance.82

Russia’s position was clearly stated in its “Foreign Policy Concept,”

published in January 2008: “Russia maintains its negative attitude towards the expansion of NATO, notably to the plans of admitting Ukraine and Georgia to the membership in the alliance, as well as to bringing the NATO military infrastructure closer to the Russian borders on the whole, which violates the principle of equal security [and] leads to new dividing lines in Europe.”83 Putin received considerable attention in the western press that month when, at a press conference with Yushchenko, he said: “It is horrible to say and terrifying to think that Russia could target its missile systems at Ukraine, in response to deployment of such installations on Ukrainian territory. Imagine this for a moment.

This is what worries us.” It is important to note that, read closely, Putin appears to be threatening to target Ukraine not just for joining NATO, but if NATO missiles were deployed in Ukraine. In the same statement, he said that Russia has “no right to interfere” with Ukraine’s foreign policy and that “if Ukraine wants its sovereignty restricted, that is its own business.”84 Alongside measured statements such as that one were the remarks of Foreign Minister Lavrov: “Russia will do everything it can to prevent the admission of Ukraine and Georgia into NATO.”85 Similarly, Putin advisor Sergei Markov stated that “Ukraine’s accession to NATO

would be perceived by many Russians as occupation of a part of their 81 Paul Ames, “Bush Support Unlikely to Win NATO Membership Track for Georgia, Ukraine,” Associated Press International, April 3, 2008.

82 Samuel Charap and Timothy Colton, Everyone Loses: The Ukraine Crisis and the Ruinous Contest for Post-Soviet Eurasia (London: Routledge, 2017), p. 88.

83 “Foreign Policy Concept of the Russian Federation,” January 12, 2008, http://

en.kremlin.ru/supplement/4116.

84 Vladimir Socor, “Putin Warns Ukraine against Seeking NATO Membership,” Eurasia Daily Monitor 5, 29, February 14, 2008.

85 Quoted in Mark Kramer, “Russian Policy toward the Commonwealth of Independent States: Recent Trends and Future Prospects,” Problems of Post-Communism 55, 6 (2008): 9.

The Bucharest Summit

163

homeland. Ukrainians are Russians anyway.”86 The contradictory statements among Russian leaders at the time allowed western leaders to hear whichever message they preferred, and allowed later analysts to claim either that Russia had clearly stated that it regarded membership for Ukraine as a mortal danger, or that it had given no such indication.

For his part, Yushchenko tried to reassure Russia, saying: “Can one imagine that there will be a NATO base in Sevastopol? Of course not, and there never will be … [we] are not going to take any steps that would create threats to Russia.”87 After the misunderstandings around what commitments were made during the German unification discussions in 1990, Russian leaders would not have been reassured.

That same day, Foreign Minister Lavrov, in Geneva, warned the West against recognizing the independence of Kosovo. “Many of them [western countries], frankly, do not understand the risks and dangers and threats associated with a unilateral declaration of Kosovo independence.

They do not understand that it would inevitably result in a chain reaction in many parts of the world, including Europe and elsewhere.”88 This was an issue that had continued to annoy Russia since 1999, and was later used to justify supporting separatism in Georgia and the annexation of Ukraine. At the moment in 2008, it was another case where Russia felt that its interests were being ignored, and another way in which the Yugoslav wars continued to corrode the West’s relations with Russia.

It is not clear how hard the United States pushed for a MAP, but France and Germany strongly resisted, and they carried the day, getting the United Kingdom to back them. The discussion was animated, with a Polish delegate accusing Germany of being “more worried for Moscow than for your allies.”89 A MAP was rejected, but the two aspirants were encouraged in the Declaration released at the end of the summit:

“NATO welcomes Ukraine’s and Georgia’s Euro-Atlantic aspirations for membership in NATO. We agreed today that these countries will become members of NATO.”90 Merkel, who had opposed a MAP, said

“It is their destiny and vocation to be partners in NATO,” but “criteria need to be met and we need another phase of intense commitment.”91

The German deputy foreign minister, Gernot Erler, said: “There has 86 Malek, “The ‘Western Vector,’” p. 536.

87 Quoted in Socor, “Putin Warns Ukraine.”

88 Rosalind Ryan, “‘Join Nato and We’ll Target Missiles at Kiev,’ Putin Warns Ukraine,”

The Guardian, February 12, 2008.

89 Cited in Charap and Colton, Everyone Loses, p. 88.

90 “Bucharest Summit Declaration,” April 3, 2008, NATO Press Release (2008) 049.

91 Quoted in Paul Ames, “Under Pressure from Russia, NATO Delays Membership Offers to Ukraine, Georgia,” Associated Press International, April 4, 2008.

164

Reform and Reversal, 2004–2010

already been enough tension with Moscow regarding missile defense, for example.”92

While the position taken at Bucharest reflected the need for compromise in the alliance, and also a compromise between Ukraine and Georgia’s interests and those of Russia, Charap and Colton called it “the worst of all worlds: while providing no increased security to Ukraine and Georgia, the Bucharest Declaration reinforced the view in Moscow that NATO was determined to incorporate them at any cost.”93

Aleksandr Torshin, first deputy chairman of Russia’s Federation Council sounded satisfied with the outcome: “NATO made a sensible decision not to grant Membership Action Plans to Ukraine and Georgia, and this decision was influenced by Russia’s firm and measured position.”94 Similarly, some in the West saw the decision as a “major diplomatic coup for Russia” and Putin, and some criticized NATO for letting Russia have too much influence and for seeming to abandon its principle that any European democracy was eligible for membership.95

Others were more negative. Foreign Minister Lavrov said: “We will do all we can to prevent Ukraine’s and Georgia’s accession into NATO and to avoid an inevitable serious exacerbation of our relations with both the alliance and our neighbors.”96

Putin, speaking in Bucharest at Russia’s meeting with NATO the day after the NATO summit closed, said: “The emergence of a powerful military bloc at our borders will be seen as a direct threat to Russian security.”97 Putin was reported to have said to President Bush at the summit: “You realize, George, that Ukraine is not even a state! What is Ukraine? A part of its territory belongs to Eastern Europe, while another part, a significant one, was given over by us!”98 In June, the Duma passed a measure urging Putin to withdraw from the 1997 Friendship Treaty if Ukraine was given a Membership Action Plan, confirming what many had suspected: that Russia’s acceptance of Ukraine’s territorial integrity was not unconditional. Rossiiskaya Gazeta urged a response: 92 Paul Ames, “NATO Summit Set to Reject Bush Drive for Early Membership for Ukraine, Georgia, Macedonia,” Associated Press International, April 3, 2008.

93 Charap and Colton, Everyone Loses, p. 88.

94 Quoted in Malek, “The ‘Western Vector,’” p. 532.

95 Andrew Blomfield, “Not Yet, NATO Tells Ukraine, Georgia; Denial of Membership Seen as Major Diplomatic Coup for Russia, Putin,” Ottawa Citizen, April 4, 2008, p. A8.

96 “Russia FM: Moscow Will Do All It Can to Prevent NATO Membership for Ukraine, Georgia,” Associated Press, April 8, 2008.

97 Quoted in Adrian Blomfield and James Kirkup, “Stay Away, Vladimir Putin Tells NATO,” The Telegraph, April 5, 2008.

98 Quoted in Malek, “The ‘Western Vector,’” p. 539.

Russia Invades Georgia

165

Russia must render comprehensive aid to all anti-NATO Ukrainian politicians and social forces, not sparing resources for that, including financial resources …

It is time to stop fearing the cries about ‘the interference in the internal affairs of Ukraine’ … The nationalists in Kiev must receive an unambiguous warning that Russia does not have the slightest motivation and obligation to support the territorial integrity of Ukraine as a candidate for membership in NATO.99

The Bucharest commitment, while seen at the time as a step back from an immediate Membership Action Plan, was widely cited later by those arguing that western policy was the cause of the war in Ukraine. Whether that is true is impossible to say. The fact that a move intended as a concession to Russia may have deeply antagonized it points to how incompatible aims were and how intense the security dilemma had become. When Zbigniew Brzezinski said that the result of the summit was a “strategic victory and only a tactical defeat” for Ukraine, it is likely that in Russia this was seen as a tactical victory and a strategic defeat.

Russians may have felt similarly about Georgian President Mikhail Saakashvili’s statement that “This is a geopolitical coup.”100 In 2011, Sergei Karaganov spelled out the Russian position stridently “NATO expansion into Ukraine is something Russia would view as absolutely unacceptable because it then becomes a vital threat. In political jargon, this kind of threat means war.”101

Russia Invades Georgia

The war in Georgia in 2008 marks an important turning point in Russia’s policy.102 While this was far from the first time that Russia had intervened in Georgia or another of the former Soviet states, earlier interventions

were

accompanied

by

claims

that

Russian

forces

were

peacekeepers. In the 2008 invasion, Russian tanks crossed the border into Georgia and Russian aircraft bombed Georgian cities. Russia laid the groundwork for the conflict by issuing passports to residents of the breakaway regions of Georgia and, in the weeks before the war, there was a series of violent provocations by the separatist regimes in Abkhazia and 99 Quoted in ibid., p. 540.

100 Quoted in Ames, “Under Pressure from Russia.”

101 Sergei Karaganov, “An Iron Fist to Keep NATO at Bay,” Russia in Global Affairs, March 4, 2011. Karaganov went on to state that NATO expansion to Ukraine and Georgia had been forestalled only by the “iron fist,” Russia’s invasion of Georgia.

102 For a discussion of the war and its consequences, see Ronald Asmus, A Little War that Shook the World: Georgia, Russia, and the Future of the West (New York: St. Martin’s, 2010); and Gerard Toal, Near Abroad: Putin, the West and the Contest over Ukraine and the Caucasus (New York: Oxford University Press, 2017), which stresses the similarities between Russia’s intervention in Georgia and Ukraine.

166

Reform and Reversal, 2004–2010

South Ossetia that Russia supported. At the time, the invasion was seen as motivated by a desire to undermine Georgian President Mikhail Saakashvili, to demonstrate Russia’s power (and the West’s impotence in this region), and to clarify Russia’s objections to NATO expansion. It was also seen as a “tit-for-tat” for western support for Kosovo’s independence. A member of Russia’s Duma said: “Today, it is quite obvious who the parties in the conflict are. They are the US, UK, Israel who participated in training the Georgian army, Ukraine who supplied it with weapons. We are facing a situation where there is a NATO aggression against us.”103 While Georgia has received much of the blame for igniting military conflict, Russia’s response was clearly intended to do more than just stop the conflict or restore the status quo. In March 2008, the Russian Duma had passed a resolution urging the government to consider recognizing the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, and Georgia complained of the “creeping annexation of a sovereign state.”104 This may have led the Georgian government to believe that drastic measures were needed to defend the status quo, but resorting to military force against territories backed by Russia was bound to turn out badly.

The damage caused to Russia’s relations with the West was both profound and limited. On one hand, despite the widespread view that Georgian President Saakashvili was partly to blame for responding to provocations and giving Russia the excuse it sought to invade, the war increased the perception that Russia was actively seeking to overturn the post-Cold War order, and that it was now willing to use force to do so. In terms of concrete measures, however, very little was done. As at Bucharest, the traditional European powers, including France, Germany, and Italy, did not want to alienate Russia for the benefit of a small neighbor. They prevailed over the desire of the United States and the postcommunist EU members to respond more resolutely. There was a recognition that there was not much they could do to challenge Russia militarily in the Caucasus, and there was not much appetite for sanctions. Despite the outrage over the invasion, there were important joint interests that most leaders wanted to continue pursuing. Russia continued to facilitate transit to Afghanistan, and contributed a contingent to an EU peacekeeping mission in Chad in 2009.105

103 “A Scripted War,” The Economist, August 14, 2008.

104 “Russia FM: Moscow Will Do All It Can to Prevent NATO Membership for Ukraine, Georgia,” Associated Press, April 8, 2008.

105 Tumanov et al., “Russia-EU Relations,” p. 128.

Reset and Overload

167

Reset and Overload

In June 2008, Russia’s new president, Dmitry Medvedev, speaking in Berlin, took a significant initiative to put Russia’s relations with the West on a better footing. Medvedev proposed a new “European Security Treaty” that would create and codify a new security architecture for Europe, which many believed had been missing since the end of the Cold War.106 Expressed in a “fourteen points” format that recalled Woodrow Wilson’s post-World War I proposals, Medvedev sought to move past the emerging division of Europe into NATO members and non-NATO members. Having recognized that Russian NATO membership was no longer a real possibility, Russia now sought an arrangement that would surpass NATO as the most important institution for European security. That Russia must be a part of whatever organization was to be most important in governing European security was self-evident to Russians and to many in the West as well. The proposal was intended to create a new architecture for European security that included Russia, a task that had been unfulfilled since 1989.

Medvedev proposed as an underlying principle the “indivisibility of security.” The draft treaty that emerged contained sweeping and vague commitments such as: “Any security measures taken by a Party to the Treaty individually or together with other Parties, including in the framework of any international organization, military alliance or coalition, shall be implemented with due regard to security interests of all other Parties”

(Article 1), and “A Party to the Treaty shall not undertake, participate in or support any actions or activities affecting significantly security of any other Party or Parties to the Treaty” (Article 2, Paragraph 1).107 On questions of armed conflict, the draft treaty combined a recapitulation of Article 51 of the UN Charter and Article V of the NATO charter. The key point was that “[E]very Party shall be entitled to consider an armed attack against any other Party an armed attack against itself” (Article 7, Paragraph 2). This would, in effect, bring Russia inside the NATO

Article V commitment and give it considerable latitude to intervene abroad.

Medvedev’s proposal did not get far for three reasons. First, it was seen as lacking substance. The language in the treaty all sounded good, but it 106 The proposal is discussed in Nikita Lomagin, “Medvedev’s ‘Fourteen Points’: Russia’s Proposal for a New European Security Architecture,” in Roger E. Kanet, ed., Russian Foreign Policy in the 21st Century (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011), pp. 181‒

203; and Richard Weitz, “The Rise and Fall of Medvedev’s European Security Treaty,”

German Marshall Fund of the United States, “On Wider Europe,” May 2012.

107 “The Draft of the European Security Treaty,” Kremlin website.

168

Reform and Reversal, 2004–2010

was hard to imagine how it could be used practically to resolve the disagreements that the region faced, let alone a conflict like Yugoslavia.

Like other collective security proposals, it seemed likely to work only when it was not needed. Referring in his Berlin speech to the League of Nations and Kellogg-Briand pact, which most regarded having failed spectacularly to preserve peace, Medvedev said that: “In today’s world, when no one wants war in Europe and we have all been made wiser by the lessons of the twentieth century, such an agreement has a better hope of success.”108 Second, it was seen as a tactic to weaken NATO. While it made sense that Russia wanted to reduce the role of an organization from which it was excluded, NATO leaders continued to believe that, for all its faults, NATO was the best available instrument for managing post-Cold War security challenges in Europe. Third, shortly after Medvedev proposed the treaty, Russia went to war in Georgia. This reinforced the sense among many that the main problem of European security was Russia, and that limiting Russia’s assertiveness was the best way to increase security. The failure of Medvedev’s proposal to gain significant traction appears to have ended Russia’s effort to forge a European-Russian “pole” in world affairs distinct from the United States. For all of western Europe’s resentment over US behavior, most did not want to replace its role in Europe with Russia.

Even after the Georgia war, the West too sought to find ways to reduce tensions, and this desire drove the “reset” policy of the incoming Obama administration in 2009. Obama was undeterred by either the war in Georgia or Russia’s announcement the day after his election that it would deploy Iskander missiles to Kaliningrad, the Russian exclave situated on the Baltic Sea between Lithuania and Poland. Not to be sidetracked, the Obama administration included Russia in its intention to revise US policy in a less assertive, less interventionist, and more pragmatic direction. For the first time in the post-Cold War era, the United States seemed willing to temper its support for democratization with a new realism.

In one of the more symbolic (but not truly substantive) episodes of the post-Cold War era, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton presented her Russian counterpart Sergei Lavrov with a large red “reset button” at a meeting in Geneva in March 2009. Unfortunately, the button prepared by the US side for the photo opportunity used the Russian word pere-gruzka (overload) rather than perezagruzka (reset or reboot).109 The 108 Medvedev, “Speech at Meeting with German Political, Parliamentary and Civic Leaders,” June 5, 2008, http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/transcripts/320.

109 Mikhail Zygar, “The Russian Reset That Never Was,” ForeignPolicy.com, December 9, 2016.

The Road to Ukraine’s 2010 Presidential Election 169

desire for a “reboot” was real, and the Obama administration made substantial moves to pursue it. The Obama team sought Russian help on a range of issues, such as preserving the “northern corridor” supply route into Afghanistan and containing Iran’s nuclear program. In cutting funding for the deployment of missile defense systems in Europe, which were aimed at Iran but which Russia saw as threatening, Obama acceded to an important Russian wish in the field of security, and he was roundly criticized for it domestically. This represents one of those cases where a leader faced a significant domestic cost for trying to reduce tensions in this relationship.110

At the same time, the two sides retained vastly different perspectives on important issues. The underlying premises of US policy did not change, and the view of Russia as a country that had cynically invaded a small neighbor persisted. That Russia now had a sham president ‒

everyone understood that important decisions were still being made by Putin ‒ undermined respect for both Putin and Medvedev. For his part, Medvedev reasserted the Russian right to intervene in the near abroad.

Speaking on Russian television at the end of August 2008, he asserted five principles for Russian foreign policy:

1 “the primacy of the principles of international law”;

2 “the world should be multipolar”;

3 “develop friendly relations with Europe, the United States and other countries, as much as possible”;

4 “protecting the lives and dignity of our citizens, wherever they may be is an unquestionable priority…”;

5 “there are regions in which Russia has privileged interests.”111

These principles were essentially the same that had guided Russian foreign policy since 1992, and the fourth and fifth in particular were likely to lead to fear among Russia’s neighbors and to the broader view that Russia was seeking to intervene abroad.

The Road to Ukraine’s 2010 Presidential Election

As the year 2009 progressed, Ukraine became increasingly focused on the presidential election due to take place in two rounds in January and 110 Senator John McCain called the decision “seriously misguided” and John Bolton, the former ambassador to the UN, said that “Russia and Iran are the big winners.” See

“Obama Scraps Bush-era Europe Missile Shield,” nbcnews.com, September 17, 2009.

111 Dmitry Medvedev, “Interview Given by Dmitry Medvedev to Television Channels Channel One, Rossia, NTV,” August 31, 2008, Kremlin website.

170

Reform and Reversal, 2004–2010

February 2010.112 In addition to all of the other problems facing Ukraine during the Yushchenko years, the country was hit hard by the global financial crisis that began in 2007. In 2009, Ukraine’s GDP declined 15

percent, which by itself was probably sufficient to doom the reelection chances of an incumbent leader. President Yushchenko’s popularity had plummeted. His tactical alliance with Yanukovych had alienated many of his core supporters, and the continuation of corruption in the country alienated many others. In polling in 2009, support for Yushchenko consistently registered in the single digits.

The frontrunners were two familiar faces, Yuliya Tymoshenko and Viktor Yanukovych. Both had served as PM in recent years, and they had been on opposite sides of the Orange Revolution. The economic decline, however, provided a political advantage to Yanukovych. Having lost the position of prime minister in 2007, he could run as an outsider who was not responsible for the current economic problems. Tymoshenko, as the sitting PM, was seen as largely responsible.

Tymoshenko’s challenge was exacerbated by IMF policy, which continued (as it had for many years) to push Ukraine’s government to reduce the government subsidy for gas. Tymoshenko resisted, knowing how unpopular it would be and, in part as a result, in October 2009 the IMF

withheld a $3.8 billion tranche of a loan negotiated the year before. When Yushchenko then signed a law, supported by the Party of Regions, which increased pensions and salaries for state employees, the IMF withdrew altogether.113 There was a basic contradiction between what Ukraine’s elites saw as necessary to win the election and what was needed to maintain the support of western-led financial institutions. Meanwhile, Yanukovych had refashioned himself, with the help of American consultant Paul Manafort, as the competent manager that Ukraine needed.

Observers noted that the campaign was left without a viable candidate who was a strong booster of European integration. Arseniy Yatsenyuk was one of the last to abandon that policy, in favor of a vague notion of Ukraine remaining outside of trade blocs. The term “Euro-romanticism”

that Yanukovych had aimed at Yushchenko in 2006 appeared to have stuck, and the failure of Yushchenko and the various prime ministers to deliver any real reform meant that the talk of European integration after 2004 had delivered little to voters.114

112 On the 2010 election, see Nathaniel Copsey and Natalia Shapovalova, “The Ukrainian Presidential Election of 2010,” Representation 46, 2 (2010): 211‒225.

113 Fean, “A Return to Multi-Vectoral Balancing?” p. 7.

114 See Elena Gnedina, “EU Running on Empty in Ukraine,” euobserver.com, November 16, 2009; and Volodymyr Yermolenko, “Mutual Distrust Blurs EU-Ukraine Summit,”

euobserver.com, December 7, 2009.

The Road to Ukraine’s 2010 Presidential Election 171

In the first round of the election, Yanukovych finished first with 35.3 percent and Tymoshenko second with 25.1 percent of the vote.

Others were far behind (Yushchenko received a meager 5.5 percent).

While Yanukovych looked to be the frontrunner going into the second round, it was expected that many of those voters whose candidates were eliminated would vote for Tymoshenko. In the second round, alliances from 2004 were turned on their head. Yushchenko supported his old enemy Yanukovych over his old ally Tymoshenko. The final result was close, with Yanukovych winning by 49.0 percent to 45.5

percent.

Despite widespread fears of a repeat of the 2004 electoral fraud, the 2010 election was widely regarded as “free and fair.” The OSCE’s Final Report on the election stated that: “The presidential election met most OSCE commitments and other international standards for democratic elections and consolidated progress achieved since 2004.

The process was transparent and offered voters a genuine choice between candidates representing diverse political views. However, unsubstantiated allegations of large-scale electoral fraud negatively affected the election atmosphere and voter confidence in the process.”115

As in previous elections, the vote was regionally polarized, with Yanukovych winning over 80 percent of the vote in much of eastern and southern Ukraine and Crimea, and Tymoshenko winning over 80 percent in much of the west. Across all of Ukraine’s oblasts, the voting pattern of 2010 closely resembled that of 2004.116 Tymoshenko also won a plurality in much of central Ukraine, but Yanukovych’s huge margin in the heavily populated east was crucial. Equally important was low voter turnout: Yanukovych won the election in 2010 with 12.5 million votes, 360,000

fewer than he had garnered in finishing second in 2004. Tymoshenko, however, received only 11.6 million, 3.5 million fewer than Yushchenko had in 2004. The Party of Regions’ ability to mobilize in the east was crucial.

Among Yushchenko’s last acts as president was to bestow the title

“Hero of Ukraine” on the World War II-era figure Stepan Bandera, who had been a leader of the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists. It would be hard to think of a more divisive step. Among Ukrainian nationalists, 115 OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, “Ukraine Presidential Election 17 January and 7 February 2010: OSCE/ODIHR Election Observation Mission Final Report,” April 28, 2010.

116 Timothy J. Colton, “An Aligning Election and the Ukrainian Political Community,”

East European Politics and Societies 25, 1 (February 2011): 12.

172

Reform and Reversal, 2004–2010

Bandera symbolized the Ukrainians who had fought tenaciously for Ukraine’s independence against the overwhelming might of the Soviet Union. But his collaboration with Nazi forces and his association with the murder of Jews and Poles made him, in the eyes of many, simply a fascist and a murderer. To many, it was inconceivable that he could be praised, let alone made a “Hero of Ukraine.”117 The historiography of Bandera and the Ukrainian Insurgent Army is among the most bitterly contested issues in Ukraine, and feeds the notion in Russia and the West that those most committed to Ukraine’s independence are fascists or are tolerant of fascists. Yushchenko’s decision was a godsend for those, like Yanukovych and the Russian government, who wanted to paint pro-western politicians as extremists.

Conclusion

Five years after being disgraced by transparent voter fraud and losing the rerun of the 2004 election, Viktor Yanukovych won the presidency freely and fairly. Ironically, Yanukovych achieved democratically what he could not achieve through fraud. Between 2004 and 2010, Ukraine had become a much more consolidated democracy, as the election showed, and partly due to that had become more integrated with Europe. Many in Ukraine and in the West believed that Yanukovych had accepted Ukraine’s democratic transition and would now govern as a “normal”

democratic leader. There was hope that in contrast to the inefficacy of the Orange Coalition, Yanukovych would be able to take the concrete steps needed to push integration forward, while also soothing Ukraine’s regional divisions.118

The intervening five years had seen three broad developments that shaped the transition from the crisis of 2004 to that of 2014. First, within Ukraine, the record of progress was uneven. On the one hand, the 117 Bandera’s legacy is so divisive that it is almost impossible to characterize it in a way that will not be seen by one side or another as a dangerous distortion. For a valiant attempt to provide a balanced assessment of Bandera and his legacy by someone who has deeply researched the extreme violence that Ukraine experienced in that era, see Timothy Snyder, “A Fascist Hero in Democratic Kiev,” New York Review of Books, February 24, 2010. Snyder concludes: “In embracing Bandera as he leaves office, Yushchenko has cast a shadow over his own political legacy.”

118 For one such optimistic assessment, see Samuel Charap, “Seeing Orange,”

Foreignpolicy.com, January 8, 2010. For a detailed discussion of those, including in the US State Department, who expressed optimistic views about Yanukovych, see Taras Kuzio, “Viktor Yanukovych Two Years On: Why Many Got Him Wrong,”

Eurasia Daily Monitor 9, 39, February 24, 2012.

Conclusion

173

creeping authoritarianism of the Kuchma era had been reversed, and pluralism and political competition were thriving. On the other hand, this increasing democracy did little to reduce the corruption that irritated many Ukrainians or to advance economic reform. Many seemed to believe, to the contrary, that the divisiveness of the Orange movement had undermined reform, and that a stronger, or at least more unified, leadership was needed. The hopes raised by many in 2004 that Ukraine would move rapidly toward the West were not borne out, and the squandering of this opportunity had immense consequences. After 2010, Ukraine was due to refight many of the battles that had led to the Orange Revolution.

Second, Ukraine’s position between Russia and the West continued to create tension within Ukraine, between Ukraine and Russia, and between Russia and the West. The Orange Revolution had not moved Ukraine into the West, but it had increased the belief in the West that this was Ukraine’s natural place, as demonstrated by the vague commitment to eventual NATO membership. Russia, however, had not abandoned its own claim to Ukraine, and expressed with increasing stridence its opposition to Ukraine’s westward trajectory. While invading Georgia may have been intended to signal Russia’s seriousness, the effect in the West was not to increase respect for Russia, but to reaffirm to many the need to stand up to it. The West and Russia were more at odds than ever about what constituted the status quo, and therefore which changes were legitimate and which were signs of aggression.

A major change in this period was that after 2008 the European Union’s European Neighborhood Policy began to eclipse NATO

membership as the main vector of Ukraine’s integration into the western institutions.

Finally, the question of democracy continued to challenge understandings of the status quo even further. Russia’s “castling” move, which made Putin prime minister and Medvedev president, was a transparent manipulation, contrastingly sharply with Ukraine’s competitive presidential election. In both Ukraine and Georgia, governments that came to power through street protests were also seeking to join the West politically, a correlation that Russia saw as ominous. The promotion of autocracy was a clear part of Russia’s strategy to maintain its declared sphere of influence.

By 2010, Russia and the West were in a more conflictual position than they had been in since the Cold War. The Orange Revolution, the war in Georgia, autocracy in Russia, and disagreement over Kosovo all served to drive the sides apart. Moreover, there was now no doubt that Ukraine was a battleground between Russia and the West. The failure of NATO’s

174

Reform and Reversal, 2004–2010

compromise at Bucharest showed how hard it was to avoid that conflict.

There was, perhaps, one potential piece of good news. The election of Yanukovych made Russia feel more secure about Ukraine, and led many in the West to believe that Ukraine would have leadership of increased pragmatism and competence. Instead, Viktor Yanukovych was to be a new force of instability and conflict.

