On February 25, 2010, Viktor Yanukovych was inaugurated as Ukraine’s fourth president. In his address to parliament he stressed moderation and balance, both domestically and internationally. To his domestic opponents, he stressed the importance of working with the parliamentary opposition. “Says the Bible: ‘Make your peace with your adversary quickly, while you are still on the road with him…’ Life has confirmed this simple and obvious truth: people don’t like being shown bare fists.

They are more likely to trust those who stretch out their hands as a sign of peace.”1

In foreign policy, his speech reasserted the “multivector” foreign policy of Leonid Kuchma, after the pro-western policy of Yushchenko: As president, I have a clear understanding of what kind of foreign policy corresponds today with the national interests of Ukraine. Being a bridge between East and West, an integral part of Europe and the former Soviet Union at the same time, Ukraine will select the kind of foreign policy that would allow our state to receive the maximum benefit from the development of equal and mutually beneficial relations with the Russian Federation, the European Union and the United States and other countries that influence the situation in the world.

These two pronouncements played to two different sorts of wishful thinking. The first was the hope that the Yanukovych of 2010, who had campaigned as a moderate, reform-oriented pragmatist, had replaced the Yanukovych of 2004, who had tried to seize power via a rigged election.

The second was Yanukovych’s own hope that he could have it both ways in foreign policy, integrating to some extent with both the European Union and Russia while playing them off against one another. Both hopes turned out to be false, and the result in 2013 was confrontation in the streets over the two linked issues: would Ukraine be democratic, or 1 “President Viktor Yanukovych’s Feb. 25 Inaugural Speech in Parliament,” Kyiv Post, February 25, 2010.

175

176

Viktor Yanukovych and the Path to Confrontation

would Yanukovych eliminate opposition? And would Ukraine join Russia or the West?

Yanukovych Consolidates Power

While Yanukovych spoke in his inaugural address about respecting the opposition, he also asserted the need for a working parliamentary majority, and he proceeded to build one. However, he accomplished this using illegal means, and then used this majority to undertake further consolidation that many saw as undermining the country’s de facto pluralism and democratic aspirations. He had been elected on a slim majority, and the country remained divided. This campaign to concentrate power and eliminate political competition, more than any other domestic or international force, set the stage for the Euromaidan, because it eventually created, for those in Ukraine opposed to Yanukovych or supportive of democracy, the same dilemma as that of 2004: was there any way to restore pluralism besides street protests?

Yanukovych’s multi-pronged approach to concentrating power built upon the tactics that Kuchma had used earlier. To control formal institutions, such as the parliament, he relied largely on informal means, such as bribing deputies. He then used control of the parliament both to change laws that constrained him, and to ensure that parliament did not respond to various unconstitutional steps. The ability to win control of the Constitutional Court was essential in this process. Crucially, the amassing of political power was matched by an effort to concentrate economic power, which was both a goal by itself as well as providing the means to further political power.2

Three key moves by Yanukovych dramatically bolstered his power.

The first was the formation of a majority in parliament that he controlled.

As Henry Hale has shown, in “patronal” systems, there is an incentive for actors ‒ even members of the opposition ‒ to “bandwagon” with whom-ever is in power, in order to share the gains from patronage and to avoid being punished by selective law enforcement.3 Fairly quickly after Yanukovych’s inauguration, therefore, he was able to entice several members of opposition parties in parliament to switch sides, helping him form a majority. According to the law, however, members of parliament were elected as members of parties, and had to give up their seats if they left 2 On Yanukovych’s amassing of power, see Serhiy Kudelia, “The House That Yanukovych Built,” Journal of Democracy 25, 3 (July 2014): 19‒34.

3 Henry E. Hale, Patronal Politics: Eurasian Regime Dynamics in Comparative Perspective (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2014).

Yanukovych Consolidates Power

177

their parties.4 By retaining their seats while switching parties, the deputies were in violation of the law, but although the opposition howled, the majority ignored their protests. The Constitutional Court ruled that this was legal, showing that it was already in Yanukovych’s camp.

With the parliament in his control, Yanukovych was able to have his preferred candidate for prime minister, Nikolai Azarov, selected. Azarov had overseen tax collection under Kuchma, and had helped Kuchma use tax collection to punish his adversaries. Yanukovych managed to accomplish what none of his predecessors had been able to do: to form a unified government in which parliament, prime minister, and president were united by a single political force. In the abstract, this would help overcome the divisiveness that had so often paralyzed Ukrainian politics. In practice, Yanukovych used this unification of power to pursue still greater power.

The next step was a revision of the constitution, which Yanukovych achieved not through the amendment process, but by getting the Constitutional Court to invalidate the amendments that were made as part of the pact that ended the Orange Revolution. Those amendments sought to limit the power of the presidency, which Kuchma had abused, by giving parliament the power to select the prime minister and giving the prime minister control over key ministries, such as Interior, which were prominent in law enforcement and, therefore, central to the use of selective law enforcement for political and economic purposes. In 2004, the Party of Regions had supported those changes, to ensure that if Yushchenko prevailed in the rerun of the election, he would not be too powerful. In 2010, with Yanukovych in office, the party reversed course, and an important element of balance was lost. Lacking the 300 votes in the parliament needed to amend the constitution, Yanukovych got the Constitutional Court to declare the 2004 changes themselves unconstitutional, on procedural grounds. Exactly how Yanukovych got the Constitutional Court to issue its decision (it had not objected to the measures previously) is unknown, though the general assumption is that bribery was involved.

This change gave Yanukovych unfettered control over appointments in the executive branch, which had both direct and indirect effects. The direct effect was that he could now appoint loyalists to key positions in all the ministries, including, crucially, those involved in law enforcement. In the Orange Revolution, Ukraine’s security forces ‒ including the military 4 This “imperative mandate” had been the subject of intense criticism at the time it was adopted, but was intended to prevent this kind of poaching of deputies that occurred under both Kuchma and Yanukovych.

178

Viktor Yanukovych and the Path to Confrontation

and the Interior Ministry ‒ had not used force against protesters, and Yanukovych was intent on ensuring that the security forces would be loyal to him in any future showdown.5 Indirectly, it meant that everyone in Ukraine knew that they could now be subject to politically motivated law enforcement. It also meant that everyone hoping to do business with any aspect of the government knew that it had to do business with Yanukovych.6 As a result of these changes, by the end of 2010 Yanukovych had obtained the kind of strong presidential constitutional arrangement that was present in Russia, and had a tightly run patronage machine, based in the Party of Regions, that could reward friends, punish enemies, and raise money. The reversion to the 1996 constitution also allowed Yanukovych to appoint the oblast governors, and he took advantage of this to replace leaders around the country with Party of Regions loyalists.7

Having concentrated political power, Yanukovych also moved to consolidate control over economic resources, and this was perhaps equally important in strengthening the eventual opposition to him. With law enforcement under his control, Yanukovych was able to put the kind of pressure on Ukrainian businesses that Putin had done in Russia.

Whereas Putin’s implicit deal seemed be “stay out of politics and you can keep your assets,” Yanukovych was more avaricious, and an increasing array of economic assets was collected into the hands of a group of close allies known as the “family.”8 Yanukovych’s son Oleksandr, a dentist, became head of a holding company that quickly became Ukraine’s fastest growing business.9

This model had the obvious benefits to Yanukovych of enriching his family and building a deeply committed circle around him. But as wealth was concentrated, the circle of those dedicated to supporting to Yanukovych narrowed, and the circle of those opposed to him ‒ privately if not publicly ‒ grew. “By shrinking the set of those enriched by rent-seeking, Yanukovych had strengthened the loyalty of his inner circle but had left many more feeling shut out and angry ‒ an outcome that made the capacity to coerce businesspeople a higher regime priority.”10 According 5 See Taras Kuzio, “Russianization of Ukrainian National Security Policy under Viktor Yanukovych,” Journal of Slavic Military Studies 25, 4 (2012): 558‒581.

6 In interviews with former Ukrainian officials, I was told that kickbacks on government contracts had become nearly universal, down to “every pencil,” in the words of one interviewee.

7 Kudelia, “The House That Yanukovych Built,” p. 22.

8 See for example, Anders Åslund, Ukraine: What Went Wrong and How to Fix It (Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2015), p. 91.

Åslund called the Yanukovych regime “the ultimate predation.”

9 Kudelia, “The House That Yanukovych Built,” p. 22.

10 Ibid., p. 22.

Yanukovych Consolidates Power

179

to Anders Åslund, Yanukovych initially had nine different business groups represented in his cabinet, but by 2013 the number was reduced to two.11 In this respect, even if his tactics were similar to Kuchma’s, his goals were much more aggressive. Eventually, many of Ukraine’s oligarchs went from seeing Yanukovych as an ally to seeing him as a threat. A good example was Petro Poroshenko, who was named minister of trade and economic development in February 2012. The very same day, his businesses were raided by the tax police, apparently as a warning to him.12 Poroshenko then ran for a seat in parliament, left the government, and later supported the Euromaidan protests.

In forming his government, Yanukovych turned to figures linked to the energy industry, most notably appointing Yuriy Boyko as energy and fuel minister. Boyko had run one of the gas intermediaries that had been abolished, and was linked to Dmytro Firtash, a major owner of RosUkrEnergo. Serhiy Lyovochkin, another of Firtash’s associates, was made head of the Presidential Administration.13 Rinat Akhmetov also had his associates in the Yanukovych cabinet, most notably Deputy Prime Minister Boris Kolesnikov. Andriy Klyuyev was put in charge of the nuclear power industry. The appointment of Dmytro Tabachnyk as minister of science and education seemed calculated to alienate national-minded Ukrainians, as Tabachnyk had questioned Ukraine’s independence and supported enhanced status for the Russian language.

A final means of consolidating power was the prosecution of his most prominent rival, Yuliya Tymoshenko. Tymoshenko had fought against Yanukovych both during the Orange Revolution and during Yushchenko’s presidency (see Chapter 5), and had nearly defeated him in the 2010 presidential election. She clearly intended to continue challenging him. One way in which Yanukovych had applied his control of the parliament was to pass laws weakening the power of the Supreme Court to review appeals of lower court decisions and changing the appointment of judges so that he had indirect control over it.14 Combined with his control over law enforcement this made it relatively easy to persecute his 11 Anders Åslund, “Ukraine Crisis: Yanukovych and the Tycoons,” BBC News, December 13, 2013.

12 “The Chocolate King Rises,” Spiegel Online, May 22, 2014. Poroshenko’s opportunism is noteworthy even in Ukraine: in 1998 he joined the pro-Kuchma Social Democratic Party. He subsequently formed his own party, Solidarnist’. He supported the Orange Revolution and took a position in Yushchenko’s government. He then joined Yanukovych’s government, left to run for parliament, and finally supported the revolution that ousted Yanukovych.

13 Dominic Fean, “A Return to Multi-Vectoral Balancing? Viktor Yanukovych’s Government and Ukrainian Foreign Policy,” Politique étrangère, 2 (Summer 2010): 12.

14 Kudelia, “The House That Yanukovych Built,” p. 23.

180

Viktor Yanukovych and the Path to Confrontation

enemies. Whereas Kuchma had failed in a political prosecution of Tymoshenko a decade earlier, Yanukovych rapidly succeeded. She and her close associate Yuriy Lutsenko were found guilty of abuse of power in connection with the 2009 gas deal with Russia (which Yanukovych did not repudiate and continued to abide by). The judges in the case received promotions and financial benefits.15

2012 Parliamentary Elections

The 2012 parliamentary elections were a significant test of Yanukovych’s new authoritarianism. Would he be able to sideline or coopt the opposition parties, as Putin had done in Russia? The answer, clearly, was no.

The election results turned out mixed for Yanukovych: while the Party of Regions and its allies won a majority of seats, parties deeply opposed to him continued to do well.

In the runup to the 2012 elections, the election law was changed yet again, returning to the formula in which half the seats were elected via proportional representation (party lists) and half in single-member districts. The single-member districts were highly subject to the influence of

“administrative resources,” since, with multiple candidates dividing the vote, a relatively small swing could have a decisive difference in each district. This meant that the ability to coerce the employees of a single factory, hospital, or school could tip the district. The patronage power of the government and economic resources that Yanukovych had amassed provided a huge advantage, as it had for the pro-Kuchma forces in 2002.

In the proportional representation vote, however, Yanukovych could not make inroads in the vast swathes of Ukraine that were either completely opposed to him or simply unsupportive.

New opposition parties emerged to compete in the election. Most notable among these was the Ukrainian Democratic Alliance for Reform, whose acronym UDAR conveniently spelled the Ukrainian word for “punch,” which was appropriate as the bloc was led by the former world boxing champion Vitaliy Klitschko. This party allied itself with Tymoshenko’s Batkivshchyna (which itself was allied with several other parties), along with the nationalist party Svoboda, in an anti-Yanukovych front.

The 2012 election was a step away from the free, fair presidential election of 2010. People inside and outside Ukraine complained of a wide variety of measures taken to skew the vote. Within Ukraine, the 15 Ibid., p. 23.

2012 Parliamentary Elections

181

opposition parties (Batkivshchyna, UDAR, and Svoboda) announced that they did not recognize the results, and said that they would work toward the impeachment of Yanukovych (which they clearly would not have the votes to do).

The OSCE final report on the election summarized:

while voters had a choice between distinct parties and election day was calm and peaceful overall, certain aspects of the preelection period constituted a step backwards compared with recent national elections. In particular, these elections were characterized by the lack of a level playing field, caused primarily by the abuse of administrative resources, lack of transparency of campaign and party financing, and the lack of balanced media coverage. While the voting and counting processes on election day were assessed positively overall, the tabulation of results was negatively assessed in nearly half of the electoral districts observed.

Post election day, the integrity of the results in some districts appeared to be compromised by instances of manipulation of the results and other irregularities, which were not remedied by the Central Election Commission (CEC) or the courts.16

While the Party of Regions managed to form a majority coalition in the parliament, the election was seen as a rebuke. Despite controlling the presidency, changing the election law, and applying considerable

“administrative resources,” the party increased its number of seats by only 10, to 185, still falling far short of an outright majority. The party’s vote count in the proportional representation part of the ballot decreased dramatically compared to 2007, indicating the limits of its popularity.

Tymoshenko’s Batkivshchyna Party continued to perform well, despite (or perhaps because of ) her imprisonment (Table 6.1).

Table 6.1 2012 parliamentary election results

Party

Percentage PR vote

PR seats

SMD seats

Total seats

Party of Regions

30.0

72

113

185

Batkivshchyna

25.6

62

32

101

UDAR

14.0

34

6

40

Communist Party

13.2

32

0

32

Svoboda

10.5

25

12

37

Others

6.7 combined

0

7

7

Independents

n/a

0

43

43

16 OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, “Ukraine Parliamentary Elections 28 October 2012 OSCE/ODIHR Election Observation Mission Final Report,”

January 3, 2013, p. 1.

182

Viktor Yanukovych and the Path to Confrontation

The performance of the nationalist party Svoboda, winning 10.5

percent of the PR vote, drew a great deal of notice. The party’s growth seemed to show the polarizing effect that Yanukovych was having, but many speculated that the party benefited from covert support from pro-Yanukovych oligarchs seeking to divide the opposition and tar it with charges of extremism. The party had taken steps to moderate its image and had struck a deal with Batkivshchyna not to compete with each other in SMD constituencies.

The modest performance of the Party of Regions prompted Yanukovych to reorganize his cabinet in a way that further narrowed the circle of represented interests and strengthened the role of the “family.” In 2013, Oleksandr Yanukovych’s firms received 70 percent of all the contracts from the state railway company, totaling $875 million ‒ and depriving other oligarchs of their “share” of these spoils.17 People were already thinking about the 2015 presidential election, and the signs ‒ both in the government and in how the 2012 election had been conducted ‒ seemed to show that Yanukovych was not planning on competing fairly. This impression was furthered by the fact that his popularity was plummeting, and preliminary polls showed him losing a head-to-head election with Klitschko.18 This created the sense of a door closing on democracy in Ukraine that provided the context for 2013.

A New Pivot to Russia

Given his domestic problems, Yanukovych had to look to foreign affairs to increase his popularity. Initially, it looked like the strategy was focused entirely on Russia. Having consolidated control over the parliament in early 2010, Yanukovych quickly moved to grant Russia some of the concessions it had been seeking.

The clearest way in which foreign policy could address domestic problems was in the area of energy prices. At a time when the global recession was depressing gas prices, Ukraine was stuck with the deal Tymoshenko had negotiated in 2009. Absent some new deal, Ukraine’s gas bills were going to increase dramatically (from $170 per thousand cubic meters in 2007, Ukraine had paid $305 in the first quarter of 2010 and was paying $330 in the second quarter).19 In April 2010, Ukrainian Prime Minister Azarov and Russian Prime Minister Putin met in Moscow to negotiate on a series of issues, resulting in an 17 Kudelia, “The House That Yanukovych Built,” pp. 25‒26.

18 Ibid., p. 26.

19 Fean, “A Return to Multi-Vectoral Balancing?,” p. 5; “Russia, Ukraine Voice Optimism at New Gas Deal,” Kyiv Post, April 20, 2010.

A New Pivot to Russia

183

agreement signed in Kharkiv by Presidents Yanukovych and Medvedev on April 21. The Kharkiv agreement, as it came to be known, essentially traded lower gas prices in return for concessions on the Black Sea Fleet and Crimea.20

Russia’s apparent preference for moving to market prices in the gas sector, and for getting Gazprom to focus on profits over geopolitics, had been reversed, or perhaps simply trumped by a more important goal. Gas subsidies were again being used to induce Ukraine to move closer to Russia. Naturally, the increased subsidies would be popular with Ukrainian consumers, and naturally they would provide ample opportunity for rent-seeking by Ukrainian elites.

Yanukovych was able to negotiate a 30 percent discount on Russian gas through 2019. This represented both good and bad news. It was estimated to save Ukraine $4 billion per year,21 but Ukraine would still be paying more than western European countries.22 Moreover, onerous provisions such as “take or pay” remained in place. In return, the new agreement updated the 1997 Friendship Treaty, extending Russia’s lease on the Sevastopol naval base for twenty-five years, to 2042.23

For Russia, the extension of the Sevastopol lease was important both symbolically and substantively. Symbolically, it maintained a Russian presence in Crimea, and gained Ukraine’s acknowledgement that this was to be a long-term, rather than transitory, arrangement. Substantively, rather than beginning to transition operations away from Sevastopol in anticipation of the existing lease’s expiration, Russia could now expand its footprint there. Following the agreement, Russia embarked on a major program of upgrading the base and deploying more modern weapons there.24

For Yanukovych, the agreement won the support of the Russian government, which had been lukewarm about his election, and provided some relief on one of the hardest issues in Ukrainian politics, the rising cost of gas. He gushed about it: saying that Ukraine’s relations with 20 Rawi Abdelal, “The Profits of Power: Commerce and Realpolitik in Eurasia,” Review of International Political Economy 20, 3 (2013): 434.

21 Sergey Tumanov, Alexander Gasparishvili, and Ekaterina Romanova, “Russia-EU

Relations, or How the Russians, Really View the EU,” Journal of Communist Studies and Transition Politics 27, 1 (March 2011): 126.

22 Robert Orttung and Indra Overland, “A Limited Toolbox: Explaining the Constraints on Russia’s Foreign Energy Policy,” Journal of Eurasian Studies 2 (2011): 81.

23 The agreement further stipulated that the lease would be automatically extended by five years if neither side objected. Following the Russian annexation of Crimea in 2014, Russia annulled the lease.

24 Taras Kuzio, The Crimea: Europe’s Next Flashpoint? (Washington, DC: Jamestown Foundation, 2010), p. 15.

184

Viktor Yanukovych and the Path to Confrontation

Russia had shifted from “confrontation and anti-Russian rhetoric” to

“equality and good neighborliness.” “The whole civilized world has welcomed the results of my talks with President Medvedev. In Washington, Brussels and all the European capitals they are regarded as Ukraine’s undeniable success.”25 For his voting base in eastern Ukraine, who supported closer relations with Russia, this was a positive move.

In contrast to the 1997 treaty, this one was quickly ratified by both parliaments, but in Ukraine, the ratification was tumultuous. Opposition to the agreement was intense, but Yanukovych had the votes, so opposition deputies resorted to throwing eggs and smoke bombs to disrupt the proceedings. Critics raised a large number of procedural problems with the ratification process.26 For those committed to Ukraine’s independence, the Kharkiv agreement seemed to confirm the worst fears about Yanukovych. The opposition online newspaper Ukrains’ka Pravda headlined “The Rada Gave Ukraine Away.”27 The Guardian judged that:

“The deal is the most concrete sign yet that Ukraine is now back under Russia’s influence following Yanukovych’s victory in February’s presidential elections. It appears to mark the final nail in the coffin of the Orange Revolution of 2004.”28 In May, with Russian President Medvedev at his side, Yanukovych stated that Ukraine was returning to the non-bloc status mentioned in its 1990 Declaration of Sovereignty, a move seen as stressing that Ukraine would not join NATO.29

However, Yanukovych resisted, as his predecessors had, Russian efforts to promote supranational integration and to gain control of gas infrastructure. His coalition of oligarchic support in the Party of Regions supported both better ties with Russia and the EU Association Agreement (AA). Yanukovych’s team insisted that the deal with Russia would not impede progress on EU integration, and a Foreign Ministry spokesman said that “We want to move towards the west. But the best way of doing this is to get gas from the east.”30 Other steps, though, such as trying to dismantle the bureau of Euro-Atlantic and European Integration under the Cabinet of Ministers, called that claim into question.

As became more obvious in negotiations over economic integration with 25 Quoted in ibid., p. 14. Kuzio was one of very few who foresaw a Russian move to seize Crimea. He pointed out that even after the Kharkiv agreement, Moscow Mayor Yurii Luzhkov continued to insist that Sevastopol was a Russian city.

26 See ibid., pp. 19‒20.

27 “Rada Zdala Ukrainu,” Ukrains’ka Pravda, April 27, 2010.

28 Luke Harding, “Ukraine Extends Lease for Russia’s Black Sea Fleet,” The Guardian, April 21, 2010.

29 Vladimir Socor, “Non-Bloc Status Covers Ukraine’s Shift to Russian-Vector Orientation,” Eurasia Daily Monitor, May 21, 2010.

30 Quoted in Harding, “Ukraine Extends Lease.”

The 2012 Language Law

185

the European Union and the CIS Customs Union, Yanukovych was playing a cynical and perhaps impossible balancing game, trying to get cheap gas without joining a Russia-led bloc or undermining integration with the EU.

The Kharkiv agreement did not actually lead to cheaper gas for Ukraine, and Yanukovych likely felt duped. Just five days after it was signed, Medvedev advanced yet another proposal for Russia to take control over much Ukraine’s gas production and transit systems.31 In 2011, Yanukovych said that “we cannot agree with it,” because it left Ukraine paying $200 more per thousand cubic meters than Germany. He asserted that the price should be the German price minus transit fees from Russia to Germany, which he put at $70 per thousand cubic meters.

He complained about Russia’s negotiating tactics, saying “Conditions are dictated as they would be to an enemy.”32

The Kharkiv agreement, intentionally or not, tied Viktor Yanukovych personally to Russia’s priority of retaining its naval base in Sevastopol. In 2014, therefore, Yanukovych’s ouster likely appeared threatening to that goal in particular.

The 2012 Language Law

A separate move by Yanukovych that Russia had long sought was a revision of Ukraine’s language law to allow regions to give Russian the status of an official language, along with Ukrainian. The question of whether Ukrainian should be the lone state language in Ukraine, or whether Russian (and perhaps other minority languages) should also have that status, had been discussed at the time of independence and again when the 1996 constitution was adopted.33 Practically, the policy was of little consequence, as Russian-language media dominated much of Ukraine, Russian was widely used, especially outside of western Ukraine, and education was available in Russian in much of the country.

Among politicians, the issue had been easily finessed, as Russophone politicians such as Leonid Kuchma and Yuliya Tymoshenko learned to speak passable Ukrainian in official roles, even if they used Russian in private.

31 Rilka Dragneva-Lewers and Kataryna Wolczuk, Ukraine between the EU and Russia: The Integration Challenge (Houndmills, Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan, 2015), p. 64.

32 “‘Usloviya vypisany kak budto dlya vraga,” Kommersant.ru, June 9, 2011.

33 The literature on language politics in Ukraine is immense. A wide-ranging recent collection of essays is Michael S. Flier and Andrea Graziosi, eds., The Battle for Ukrainian: A Comparative Perspective (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press/

Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute, 2017).

186

Viktor Yanukovych and the Path to Confrontation

Symbolically, however, the issue was of immense importance, because it was seen as establishing the identity of the Ukrainian state. Was Ukraine a Ukrainian state, as many nationalists asserted, or was it also a Russian state, as asserted by some in Ukraine and by the Russian government? For Russia, asserting the Russianness of Ukraine was part of the broader view that the two countries were not fully distinct. While the content of the bill was seen by many as not being particularly harmful, “the Party of Regions used this as a tool to mobilize a pro-Russian electorate, deflecting attention away from social and economic issues to a kind of culture war with western Ukraine. The nationalists were almost euphoric ‒ these were their issues, they were fighting for their native language.”34 This polarization was part of Yanukvoych’s strategy, and it contributed directly to his downfall.

It was one of those symbolic issues which Yanukovych had used to motivate his “base,” and he had promised in the 2010 campaign to change the law. While he initially neglected this promise, his popularity, and that of the Party of Regions, was sagging prior to the 2012 parliamentary elections, and so passing the language law was a way to motivate his voters.35 It also addressed one of the complaints Medvedev had raised in his 2009 letter to the Ukrainian leadership.36

While Yanukovych and the Party of Regions had the votes to pass the measure, opposition deputies bitterly opposed it. They surrounded the speaker of the parliament when the bill was brought up to prevent further progress on it, spurring one of the parliamentary fistfights that periodically earned Ukraine a spot on newscasts around the world. After the initial passage of the measure, a small riot broke out outside the parliament. For those who supported the status quo, the new measure represented a major reverse that itself needed to be undone. Tymoshenko, from prison, called the measure “a crime against Ukraine, the nation, its history and the people.”37 The attempted reversal of this law after Yanukovych’s downfall in 2014 was seen as an aggressive nationalist move that helped justify 34 Volodymyr Ishchenko, “Ukraine’s Fractures,” New Left Review 87 (May/June 2014): 27.

35 See Steven Pifer and Hannah Thoburn, “What Ukraine’s New Language Law Means for National Unity,” Brookings Institution, August 21, 2012, www.brookings.edu/blog/up-

front/2012/08/21/what-ukraines-new-language-law-means-for-national-unity/.

36 Medvedev had complained of “continued repression of the Russian language in public life, science, education, culture, media, and judicial proceedings.” The text of Medvedev’s letter is printed in English in Taras Kuzio, Ukraine: Democratization, Corruption and the New Russian Imperialism (Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger, 2015), pp. 438‒439. The Russian original is at “Poslaniye Presidentu Ukrainy Viktoru Yushchenko,” August 11, 2009, Kremlin website.

37 Howard Amos, “Ukraine Language Bill Prompts Clashes between Police and Protesters,” The Guardian, June 5, 2012.

Russia, the United States, and Europe

187

Russia’s intervention. A new language law was passed in 2017, to further outrage. The issue is a vivid example of how competing versions of the status quo can lead both sides to see the other as being aggressive.

Russia, the United States, and Europe

Events between 2010 and 2013 further undermined trust between Russia and the West, building the conditions for complete breakdown in 2014.

By 2010, Russia and the West had a lengthy list of disagreements and few issues that served to bring them together. After 2010, the Arab Spring and its consequences drove them further apart, while ongoing western support for democratization further threatened Putin. Those two factors combined to make democratic revolutions look more dangerous in Moscow than ever.

In June 2010, sandwiched between a Medvedev-Obama meeting in Washington and another in Ottawa, the United States arrested ten Russia “sleeper” agents who had been posing as Americans for years.

The story spurred extensive news coverage in the United States (and a popular television series). The United States traded the spies for four Russians who had been arrested for spying, and there were no diplomatic expulsions or further repercussions at the time.38 If this episode did not have the negative effect of the Ames case of 1993, it was because the relationship had deteriorated so far in the meantime.

The Arab Spring drove the sides further apart. Western governments were broadly supportive of the wave of revolutions that began in Tunisia in December 2010. By 2012, authoritarian regimes had been toppled in Libya, Egypt, and Yemen. Syria was descending into civil war, and several other states had experienced sustained street protests. These events ratcheted up Russia’s fears of democratization by revolution, and the civil war in Syria put the two sides again on opposite sides of a conflict that combined democratization and geopolitics.

Regarding Libya, Russia and the West initially agreed on the need to protect civilian populations from attacks by the Libyan military. On February 26, 2011, the UN Security Council unanimously approved Resolution 1970 freezing Muammar Gaddafi’s assets and referring his actions to the International Criminal Court. When Gaddafi’s forces threatened to overrun the opposition in Benghazi, the UN Security Council passed, with Russia abstaining this time, a new resolution 38 The case generated further rancor in 2018 when one of the western spies exchanged for the Russian agents, Sergei Skripal, was poisoned with the nerve agent Novichok in England.

188

Viktor Yanukovych and the Path to Confrontation

creating a “no fly” zone over Libya and authorizing members to use “all necessary measures” to protect civilians.

This second resolution authorized NATO to begin a bombing campaign, which Russia initially approved of. Medvedev reportedly over-ruled the Foreign Ministry’s recommendation to veto the resolution, hoping to establish his credentials as a supporter of democracy.39 Putin chimed in critically soon after: “What concerns me most is not the armed intervention itself ‒ armed conflicts are nothing new and will likely continue for a long time, unfortunately. My main concern is the light-mindedness with which decisions to use force are taken in international affairs these days.”40

However, as the conflict dragged on, NATO’s bombing campaign experienced “mission creep,” from protecting civilians to backing the rebels’ campaign to dislodge Gaddafi from power. The result was Gaddafi’s summary execution in October 2011. This enraged Russia and Putin, and probably undermined Medvedev. Not only did Russia oppose such campaigns to overturn leaders, but Russian leaders felt deceived by what to them seemed like a “bait and switch.” Russia also suffered significant economic losses due to Gadaffi’s fall, including a $3 billion railroad deal, $3.5 billion in energy deals, and $4 billion in arms sales.41

That the aftermath included the descent of Libya into civil war and the rise of ISIS there only confirmed the Russian view that the United States and the West were sowing chaos in the pursuit of geopolitical gain.

Speaking in December 2011, after announcing that he would return to the presidency in 2012, Putin was scathing about Gadaffi’s fate and the US role in it: “Who did this? Drones, including American ones. They attacked his column. Then ‒ through the special forces, who should not have been there ‒ they brought in the so-called opposition and fighters, and killed him without court or investigation.” “Sometimes it seems to 39 Mikhail Zygar, “The Russian Reset That Never Was,” ForeignPolicy.com, December 9, 2016.

40 Quoted in ibid. Zygar points out that Putin’s remarks spurred Medvedev to rebut him directly and publicly, focusing particularly on Putin’s use of the word “crusade.” “It is entirely unacceptable to use expressions that effectively point the way to a clash of civilizations. The word ‘crusade,’ for instance. We must all remember that such language could make the situation even worse.”

41 Lincoln Pigman and Kyle Orton, “Inside Putin’s Libyan Power Play,” Foreignpolicy

.com, September 14, 2017. As Pigman and Ortion detail, Russia eventually came to support the Libyan National Army and its leader Khalifa Haftar, who were trying to overthrow the UN-recognized government of Libya.

Russia, the United States, and Europe

189

me that America does not need allies, it needs vassals. People are tired of the dictates of one country.”42

By late 2011, the danger to Putin and the Russian government from street protests seemed to be growing. Parliamentary elections held on December 4 were widely regarded as rigged, but rather than take it in their stride, thousands protested in the streets of Moscow on December 10 and again two weeks later. The movement’s leader, Alexei Navalny, made a veiled threat: “I see enough people here to take the Kremlin and

[Government House] right now but we are peaceful people and won’t do that just yet.”43

Putin blamed the protests directly on the United States, saying that opposition leaders “heard the signal and with the support of the US state department began active work. We are all grownups here. We all understand the organizers are acting according to a well-known scenario and in their own mercenary political interests.”44 It is unclear whether Putin actually believed that the United States was responsible for the protests, but the accusation was valuable domestically, and the open encouragement of protests by the United States seemed to infuriate him.

If the danger of the precedent to Putin were not clear, it was made so by Senator John McCain, who told the BBC in the fall of 2011 after Gadaffi’s fall that “I think dictators all over the world, including Russia …

Maybe even Mr. Putin … are maybe a little bit more nervous” and then, after the first December protest in Moscow, tweeted “Dear Vlad, the Arab Spring is coming to a neighborhood near you.”45

The Russian government was further irritated when Michael McFaul was appointed US ambassador to Moscow in January 2012. Duma Deputy Andrei Isayev complained that “McFaul, who specializes in

‘orange revolutions,’ has been appointed as US ambassador to Russia.”46

McFaul’s meetings with opposition groups and frequent presence on social media irked the Russian government, which repeatedly criticized McFaul and even harassed him.47 This was another case where 42 Quoted in Andrew Osborn, “Vladimir Putin Lashes Out at America for Killing Gaddafi and Backing Protests,” The Telegraph, December 15, 2011.

43 Quoted by BBC News, “Moscow Protest: Thousands Rally against Vladimir Putin,”

December 25, 2011.

44 Quoted in Miriam Elder, “Vladimir Putin Accuses Hillary Clinton of Encouraging Russian Protests,” The Guardian, December 8, 2011.

45 “McCain Warns Putin of ‘Arab Spring,’” Moscow News, December 6, 2011.

46 Quoted in Fred Weir, “Moscow Ambassador McFaul’s ‘Reset’ with Kremlin Stumbles,”

Christian Science Monitor, April 4, 2012.

47 For a detailed recollection of Russia’s harassment of McFaul, see Michael McFaul,

“Putin Hazed Me: How I Was Stalked, Harassed and Surveilled by Kremlin Stooges,”

Politico, May 19, 2018.

190

Viktor Yanukovych and the Path to Confrontation

perceptions clashed. In the United States, McFaul was seen as “a principal architect of the administration’s efforts to repair ties with Russia after years of strain,” and his appointment ‒ which broke with tradition because he was not a career diplomat ‒ was seen as a sign of Obama’s seriousness about rebuilding the relationship with Russia.48 Some Russians agreed. Alexander Konovalov, of Russia’s Institute of Strategic Studies and Analysis, said that “McFaul is a young man, very close to Obama and a devoted supporter of his policy. Moreover, he is specializ-ing on Russian issues. Since McFaul is a person from presidential staff, his appointment would show that Washington pays serious attention to the Russian politics.”49 But the more widespread view in Russia was that the United States had sent a promoter of “colored revolutions” to ply his trade as ambassador.50 By 2013, US-Russia relations had reached what at that time was a post-Cold War low.

Integration: The European Union and Russia Compete

for Ukraine

For the entire post-Soviet era, there had been a fundamental imbalance between Ukraine’s relations with Russia and those with the European Union. Ukraine sought to trade with both and choose neither, and while Russia consistently wanted far more than Ukraine was willing to give, the European Union consistently offered much less than Ukraine wanted.

This began to change after 2010, and by 2013 it looked as if the European Union, with some reservations, was more actively seeking to foster integration with Ukraine. Ukraine’s discussions with the European Union and with Russia were proceeding simultaneously and were interacting with one another.51

Ever since 1991, Ukraine had sought to manage its interdependence with Russia in a way that maximized economic benefits while avoiding any kind of formal integration that limited its sovereignty. Russia had repeatedly sought to shift the management of interdependence to supranational bodies that it could control, beginning in the 1990s with the 48 Joby Warrick, “Obama to Pick Non-Diplomat as Next Ambassador to Russia,”

Washington Post, May 30, 2011, p. A4.

49 “McFaul’s Appointment May Boost Trust between U.S., Russia – Expert,” RIA Novosti, May 29, 2011.

50 McFaul recalls his time as ambassador in Michael McFaul, From Cold War to Hot Peace: An American Ambassador in Putin’s Russia (New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2018).

51 For a very detailed account of Ukraine-EU and Ukraine-Russia negotiations on integration in this period, see Dragneva-Lewers and Wolczuk, Ukraine between the EU

and Russia, to which I referred in developing this chronology.

Integration: The European Union and Russia 191

CIS. After 2010, while Yanukovych and Ukraine sought to reestablish

“multivector” foreign policy, Russia was once again seeking deeper integration, and providing both carrots and sticks to achieve it. Russia’s reassertion was likely driven by the broader assertiveness underway in its foreign policy, by the opportunity that Yanukovych appeared to present, and by the perception that Yanukovych’s discussions with the European Union threatened to pull Ukraine out of Russia’s orbit permanently.

While Yanukovych had rebalanced Ukraine’s policy toward Russia, he had not abandoned the western “vector.” As prime minister under Yushchenko, he had supported the development of the Association Agreement, as had the Party of Regions. Several of the party’s most important oligarchs, including Rinat Akhmetov and Serhiy Lyovochkin, were seen as supporting it due to their business interests, and Yanukovych put his close associate, Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council Andriy Klyuyev, in charge of negotiating the agreement.

The European Union, in striving to build closer ties with its eastern neighbors, did not see itself playing geopolitics or “geo-economics.”

Rather it saw participation in European institutions as an obvious good that other countries wanted to join in on. For this reason, it did not take a

“realist” approach to the negotiations (and was later criticized for this), and therefore did not take seriously the idea that Russia was threatened by EU integration with Ukraine.52 Whether intended or even understood, what emerged was an economic version of the security dilemma: the actions that the European Union and Russia took as defensive and benign convinced each that there was a threat that needed to be countered.

In 2010, Russia, along with Belarus and Kazakhstan, formed the Eurasian Customs Union, with the goal of developing a fully fledged customs union by 2015.53 While it started slowly, it became a priority for Putin after he returned as president in 2012. In April 2013, Putin stated that “In the event that Ukraine joins, the economic benefits to Ukraine will be … according to our estimates $9‒10 billion a year.”54

52 Cornelius Adebahr, “Reconciling European Values and Western Interests in Ukraine,”

European Leadership Network, July 4, 2014.

53 Belarus and Kazakhstan also resisted this plan, because it forced them to adopt Russia’s obligations as a WTO member without the benefits of membership. On the mix of political and economic reasons for Russia’s pursuit of a regional trade bloc, see Chris Miller, Putinomics: Power and Money in Resurgent Russia (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2018) pp. 140‒144.

54 “Putin sulit Ukrainye $10 mlrd ot Vstupleniya v TC,” LB.ua, April 25, 2013. While saying that “We will respect the choice of our partners,” he also pointed out that the other three members would suffer economically if Ukraine did not join.

192

Viktor Yanukovych and the Path to Confrontation

The crucial change in Russia’s position in 2010‒2011 was that in creating a customs union analogous to that of the EU, it too was building an organization with a clear distinction between being inside and being outside. Ukraine’s policy of picking and choosing which components of an agreement to adhere to would no longer be accepted. In 2011, Sergei Glazyev, the head of the Customs Union Commission, said: “The only option is Ukraine’s full participation in all the Work of the Customs Union. All other forms are groundless and we have informed Kyiv about it.” He continued that Ukraine’s practice of conditioning agreement on the limits imposed by the Ukrainian constitution would no longer be acceptable.55 In 2012, Yanukovych was still resisting a Russian invitation to join the Customs Union, and said it would be “necessary to change the constitution, which today prohibits us from creating supranational organs.”56

Members of a customs union share both an internal free trade area and common barriers (tariffs and other measures) with external states. The rules of the internal free trade area and the common external policy need to be agreed upon. In the case of the European Union and of the Eurasian Customs Union, governance of many issues is delegated to a supranational decision-making body. Because of Russia’s size and power (its GDP in 2010 was four and a half times that of Belarus, Kazakhstan and Ukraine combined57), it would dominate such decision making in the Eurasian Customs Union, so a decision to join the union would effectively be a decision to turn much of one’s trade policy over to Russia.

In the EU, by contrast, the largest member, Germany, accounts for less than a fifth of the vote on the issues that are not subject to unanimity.

Russia made three main arguments about why Ukraine should join the Customs Union. The first was that Ukraine would gain from improved access to the markets in Russia and the other members. The second was that, while energy was not included in the Customs Union, Russia would negotiate a better deal on gas. The third was that Ukraine would be at a disadvantage in the European Union. In fact, standard economics models applied to the two proposed deals showed that in the long term the EU Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement (DCFTA) would add 11.8 percent to Ukraine’s GDP, while the Eurasian Customs Union would decrease it by 3.7 percent).58 Slightly in contradiction, 55 Quoted in Dragneva-Lewers and Wolczuk, Ukraine between the EU and Russia, p. 67.

56 “Usloviya Vypisany kak budto dlya vraga,” Kommersant, June 9, 2011.

57 GDP figures from the World Bank; author’s calculations.

58 Veronika Movchan and Ricardo Giucci, “Quantitative Assessment of Ukraine’s Regional Integration Options: DCFTA with European Union vs. Customs Union with

Integration: The European Union and Russia 193

Putin argued that “accession to the Eurasian Union will also help countries integrate into Europe sooner and from a stronger position.”59

Russia also threatened retaliation if Ukraine joined the DCFTA with the EU, which would decrease Russia’s access to the Ukrainian market.

Putin, speaking at the Valdai conference in 2013, showed why he placed such emphasis on the project: “The Eurasian Union is a project for maintaining the identity of nations in the historical Eurasian space in a new century and in a new world. Eurasian integration is a chance for the entire post-Soviet space to become an independent center for global development, rather than remaining on the outskirts of Europe and Asia.”60 Integrating Ukraine would serve both Russia’s conception of its national identity and its economic and political interests. Richard Sakwa, while acknowledging the “hegemonic impulses” behind the plan, asserts that Russia saw a potential Eurasian Union as a second pillar, along with the EU, on which the “Common European Home” envisioned by Gorbachev would be built. He sees the Eurasian Union as a part of a broader policy of finding an alternative to what Russia saw as the hegemony of US- and western-led institutions.61 Anders Åslund wrote that “the only way to make sense of the Kremlin’s trade policy is to see it as politics mixed with old Soviet economic thinking.”62

Putin deployed a completely separate argument: the unity of Russians and Ukrainians. In July 2013, he traveled to Kyiv to mark the 1025th anniversary of the adoption of Christianity in Kyivan Rus’. After taking part in a religious service led by the Russian Patriarch Kirill, he met briefly with Yanukovych and then attended a conference organized by the pro-Russian oligarch Viktor Medvedchuk, entitled “Orthodox Slavic Values: The Basis of Civilizational Choice in Ukraine.” The point, apparently, was to argue that traditional Orthodox values were superior to the new liberal ideas taking hold in Europe. Putin said

[Y]ou are here to discuss the significance of Ukraine’s civilizational choice. This is not just Ukraine’s civilizational choice … The Baptism of Rus was a great event Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan,” German Advisory Group, Institute for Economic Research and Policy Consulting, Policy Paper PP/05/2011, November 2011, p. 11.

The reasons for the decrease under the Customs Union were tariff increases in Ukraine and trade diversion, whereas the DCFTA would actually boost trade with the EU.

59 Quoted in Dragneva-Lewers and Wolczuk, Ukraine between the EU and Russia, p. 69.

60 Quoted in ibid., p. 80.

61 Richard Sakwa, “How the Eurasian Elites Envisage the Role of the EEU in Global Perspective,” European Politics and Society 17 (2016): 4‒22.

62 Anders Åslund, “Ukraine’s Choice: European Association Agreement or Eurasian Union?” Peterson Institute for International Economics Policy Brief, September 2013, p. 6.

194

Viktor Yanukovych and the Path to Confrontation

that defined Russia’s and Ukraine’s spiritual and cultural development for the centuries to come. We must remember this brotherhood and preserve our ancestors’ traditions … Let me say again that we will respect whatever choice our Ukrainian partners, friends and brothers make. The question is only one of how we go about agreeing on working together under absolutely equal, transparent and clear conditions.63

At the same time, Russia considered creating a free trade area with those CIS members that did not join the Customs Union, which would be analogous to Ukraine being in an FTA with the European Union while not fully joining its economic union. While Ukraine favored such an arrangement, Russia dropped the idea, apparently because it would not prevent Ukraine from signing the EU Association Agreement. Russia instead insisted that Ukraine join the Customs Union. This policy highlighted the fundamental disagreement between Russia and Ukraine, even with Yanukovych’s more conciliatory approach. Russia sought a deal with Ukraine that would prevent Ukraine from signing the Association Agreement or joining the DCFTA with the EU. Ukraine was willing to integrate with Russia only to the extent that doing so did not rule out integration with the EU.

At that point, Russia and Ukraine were at an impasse, and a series of trade restrictions by Russia in 2011 put pressure on Ukraine to join the Customs Union. However, the situation was defused when the European Union refused to sign the AA while Tymoshenko was imprisoned. With the Agreement shelved for the time being, Russia relented, and the CIS

Free Trade Area agreement was signed in October 2011. The agreement included a provision that would allow members to raise tariffs to previous levels if another member joined an organization that diverted trade elsewhere. While Ukraine was able to sign a deal with Russia that did not rule out signing the Association Agreement with the EU, the agreement created a mechanism for Russia to impose penalties on Ukraine should it do so.64

While the European Union would not sign the AA as long

as Tymoshenko was in prison, it continued negotiating it, and an important preliminary agreement was reached just days after the CIS FTA was signed. In June 2012, the EU Parliament appointed European Parliament President Pat Cox and former Polish President Alexander Kwaśniewski to a “special mission” to Ukraine, charged with resolving 63 Vladimir Putin, “Orthodox-Slavic Values: The Foundation of Ukraine’s Civilisational Choice Conference,” President of Russia website, Kremlin website, http://en.kremlin.ru/

events/president/news/18961. See also David R. Marples, Ukraine in Conflict: An Analytical Chronicle (Bristol: E-International Relations, 2017), pp. 9‒11.

64 Dragneva-Lewers and Wolczuk, Ukraine between the EU and Russia, p. 76.

Integration: The European Union and Russia 195

the Tymoshenko issue and getting the Association Agreement back on track. They shuttled back and forth between Brussels and Kyiv repeatedly over the next eighteen months.65 Within the EU, leaders debated whether the European Union should isolate the Yanukovych government or engage with it. Kwaśniewski advocated engagement, arguing that isolating Ukraine would create another Belarus, and this position won out.66

When the European Union and Ukraine held a summit in February 2013, delayed from the previous December, EU President Herman Van Rompuy set a deadline in May for “determined action and tangible process” on criminal justice, which was seen as a requirement for Tymoshenko’s release. He reasserted the EU’s desire to sign the AA, but pointed out that this “implies a commitment to shared values,” that some, including Germany, still doubted.67 Yanukovych responded favorably, saying: “Ukrainian law says that EU integration is the most important direction for Ukraine to move toward and this cannot be changed today.”68

Yanukovych’s strategy, which was to try to gain the economic and political benefits of both EU and CIS integration, appeared to be working, but the respite was brief. With the European Union continuing to negotiate the AA, and Russia seeing the CIS FTA as a first step to deeper integration, the pressure continued for Yanukovych to choose one over the other. Yanukovych’s team was itself divided, with some seeing Ukraine’s ‒ and their own ‒ future better served in Europe and others favoring Russia.69

On May 31, 2013, Ukrainian PM Azarov signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on obtaining “observer” status in the Eurasian Economic Commission, the executive body of the Eurasian Customs Union (analogous to the EU Commission). This would create a Ukrainian seat on the Commission with the ability to make proposals but not to vote. While Russia saw this as the logical first step to becoming a full member, President Yanukovych assured European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso that “this new model of cooperation 65 The Cox-Kwaśniewski mission is described in extensive detail in Maciej Olchawa, Mission Ukraine: The 2012‒2013 Diplomatic Effort to Secure Ties with Europe (Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Co., 2017). It was later disclosed that Kwaśniewski was employed by the European Centre for a Modern Ukraine, which was formed by Yanukovych supporters at the advice of Yanukovych’s American advisor Paul Manafort to promote Ukraine’s EU integration and Yanukovych’s reputation in the West. See Shawn Donnan, Neil Buckley, and James Polity, “Manafort Charges Entangle Former European Leaders,” Financial Times, February 25, 2018.

66 Olchawa, Mission Ukraine, p. 50.

67 Agence France Presse, February 25, 2013.

68 EUObserver.com, February 25, 2013.

69 Olchawa, Mission Ukraine, p. 44.

196

Viktor Yanukovych and the Path to Confrontation

between Ukraine and the Eurasian Economic Union does not contradict membership of Ukraine in the WTO and the strategic course toward Eurointegration along the path of completing the Association Agreement and creation of a deep and comprehensive free trade area with the EU.”70

Russia’s Prime Minister Medvedev reasserted that Ukraine could not receive the full benefits of the Customs Union without full membership. “They will be for us an external country.”71 When the agreement on observer status was signed at the end of May, Medvedev cautioned that “This is the first step, an important step, a necessary step, and we are very happy about it, but it could be the last step, if nothing more is done.” Expressing his concern about Ukraine’s dealing with the EU, he went on to say:

But we understand that if our partners really want to take part in our newly created integration association ‒ the Eurasian Economic Union ‒ then they must take a whole series of very complicated, sometimes unpopular decisions.

Moreover, all decisions, and not only their part, of course, must not assume obligations that exclude participation in the Eurasian economic space and union. This should be plain as day to everyone.72

The European Union, through its Eastern Partnership, had decided to consider signing an Association Agreement with Ukraine which would include a DCFTA. Yanukovych’s election did not initially undermine this process, but his accretion of power, and in particular his jailing of Tymoshenko, became major concerns for the European Union. While the European Union never officially required Tymoshenko’s release, referring instead to the issue of “selective justice,” it was clear that resolving her situation was a prerequisite to signing a final deal.73 The two sides continued to negotiate, and in part because of Yanukovych’s control over the government and parliament, progress was steady on a range of issues.

The negotiations were handled by the most closely trusted of Yanukovych’s advisors, including Andriy Klyuyev. Negotiations on the Association Agreement were completed in October 2011 and a draft initialed in March 2012; a draft DCFTA was initialed in July 2012. Together, the 70 Yanukovych’s press service, quoted in “Yanukovych Zaveril Glavu Evrokomissii v priverzhennosti evrointegratsii,” LB.ua, June 1, 2013.

71 “Medvedev: Ukraina budyet ‘nyukhat’ vozdukh’ v TC,” LB.ua, March 21 2013.

72 “Medvedev: Ukraina sdelal shag k integratsii v TC,” LB.ua, May 31, 2013, emphasis added.

73 Speaking in Yalta in September 2013, Dalia Grybauskaite of Lithuania, which held the EU presidency at the time, said: “The request from the European Union on Tymoshenko’s case is still on the table and, without a solution, I do not see a possibility for the signature.” Daniel McLaughlin, “EU Warns Ukraine that Key Deals Depend on Tymoshenko’s Release from Prison,” The Irish Times, September 21, 2013.

Integration: The European Union and Russia 197

documents ran to 1,200 pages.74 The EU, however, deferred actually signing the agreements until progress was made on the rule of law, which came to be symbolized by the fate of Tymoshenko. EU leaders showed their displeasure by boycotting the final of the Euro 2012 soccer tourna-ment, turning a public relations coup for Ukraine into an embarrass-ment.75 In 2012 irregularities in the parliamentary elections made the European Union even more wary of completing the deal.

For his part, Yanukovych seemed uninterested in moving forward quickly, feeding the notion that he was realigning the country toward Russia. In particular, the offices in the executive branch responsible for making Ukraine’s legislation compatible with that of the European Union were cut back or eliminated entirely.76 While some oligarchs, including Yanukovych’s ally Rinat Akhmetov, had much to gain from access to the European market, they also had much to lose from laws that undermined their control of the Ukrainian economy. As with other leaders before him, Yanukovych was more interested in the symbolism of integration than the substance, and when the substance clashed with his interests or those of the powerful oligarchs, it lost out. This was an old problem for the European Union, but it became more urgent as the EU

became more interested in integration with Ukraine. It was getting harder for Ukraine’s leaders to attribute the failure to integrate with the European Union to the EU’s disinterest.

In December 2012, the EU Council published “Conclusions” on Ukraine that made clear its dissatisfaction with the lack of progress in Ukraine, and with the regression on some issues. “The Council notes with concern that the conduct of the 28 October parliamentary elections … constituted a deterioration in several areas.” It went on to criticize the “politically motivated convictions of members of the former Government after trials which did not respect international standards”

and to stress the need for effective implementation of the new Criminal Procedure Code and other judicial reforms. “Enacting these conditions in a meaningful, sustainable way even by the most ardent, reform-oriented government would have been a formidable challenge.”77 Yanukovych’s government was not so ardent. The European Union held out one important carrot, reaffirming “commitment to the shared objective of visa-free travel in due course.”78

74 Åslund, “Ukraine’s Choice,” p. 1.

75 Svitlana Dorosh, “Ukraine Fights Euro 2012 Boycott,” BBC.com, May 9, 2012.

76 Dragneva-Lewers and Wolczuk, Ukraine between the EU and Russia, p. 56.

77 Ibid., p. 60.

78 Council of the European Union, “Council Conclusions on Ukraine,” 3209th Foreign Affairs Council Meeting, Brussels, December 10, 2012.

198

Viktor Yanukovych and the Path to Confrontation

This same “conclusions” document also mentioned continuing preparations for the AA to be signed at the Vilnius summit scheduled for November 2013. While setting a tentative date was necessary from a bureaucratic perspective, it may also have been intended to provide some urgency to Yanukovych to resolve the outstanding issues. The effect, however, was to light the fuse on a slowly developing crisis by appearing to set a deadline for Ukraine to make a choice between Russia and the EU. The approach of the Vilnius summit strongly conditioned the rise in intensity of negotiations and threats over the next eleven months. In that final runup to the crisis ‒ which at this point no one foresaw ‒ Russia increased pressure on Ukraine to join the Eurasian Economic Union and renounce the AA, the European Union sought to counteract Russia’s pressure. Yanukovych struggled to find a way forward that did not involve rejecting either Russia or the EU, either of which might be disastrous to him politically. If he rejected Russia, Russia would punish him. If he rejected the EU, Ukrainian voters would punish him.

The insistence that Tymoshenko be released remained an obstacle to signing the AA. Yanukovych felt he could not release Tymoshenko, for at least two reasons. First, he was concerned about her as a political competitor. Either as an opponent in the 2015 election or as someone who could bring thousands of people onto the streets, she threatened his rule.

He feared not only that she may lead a pro-western “colored revolution,”

but that she might conspire with Putin, with whom Yanukovych’s relationship was strained.79 Equally important, his willingness to imprison her against the EU’s wishes sent a powerful message to other elites. In this respect, the EU’s coercion did more harm than good: the higher the price Yanukovych paid to keep her behind bars, the more powerful a signal was sent to other elites about how intent he was on punishing those who threatened him.80

In April 2013, Yanukovych sought to make a concession to the EU’s concerns without releasing Tymoshenko by pardoning Tymoshenko’s ally Yuriy Lutsenko and several other political prisoners. The ploy failed, because

the

European

Union

was

focused

almost

entirely

on

Tymoshenko. When Vitaliy Klitschko announced that he intended to run for president, Yanukovych pushed through parliament a law banning anyone who had lived in and paid taxes in a foreign country, effectively excluding Klitschko. Outsiders seem to have agreed with Yanukovych 79 See Mikhail Zygar, All the Kremlin’s Men: Inside the Court of Vladimir Putin (New York: Public Affairs, 2016), p. 259.

80 See Serhiy Kudelia, “When External Leverage Fails: The Case of Yulia Tymoshenko’s Trial,” Problems of Post-Communism 60, 1 (January‒February 2013): 29‒42.

Integration: The European Union and Russia 199

that Tymoshenko, not any of the lesser figures, was the likely challenger to Yanukovych, and that the preservation of political competition rested in large part on her fate. The European Union insisted on her release for exactly the same reason that Yanukovych resisted it. Most Ukrainians, however, were puzzled that the European Union would put so much emphasis on Tymoshenko, who was seen by many as just another oligarch.

By mid-2013, the European Union and Yanukovych had both become constrained by the web they had spun. As the Vilnius summit and the planned signing of the AA approached, the two were engaged in a game of chicken. Neither wanted to back down, but neither wanted to experience a collision. Yanukovych, knowing that deeper integration with the European Union was popular, continuously raised Ukrainians’ expectations about what could be achieved. As long as the European Union resisted, Yanukovych did not have to deliver. In that respect, the EU’s refusal to move forward while Tymoshenko was in jail solved a problem for Yanukovych. Not only would the Association Agreement anger Russia, it would likely eat into the rent-seeking opportunities he and his allies were exploiting. The EU’s ultimatum on Tymoshenko allowed Yanukovych to blame the European Union for the impasse while avoiding problems with Russia and some of the oligarchs.

The European Union was also trapped by its commitment to

Tymoshenko’s release, because as long as that prerequisite remained in place, the Association Agreement could not go forward. In earlier years, the European Union would have been sanguine about this, not really needing Ukraine. But the perception that Yanukovych was both making a pluralist country autocratic and taking a potentially European country into Russia’s orbit raised the EU’s interest in getting the deal done. Some were beginning to argue that the European Union should sign the AA regardless of Tymoshenko’s release, because the chances for democracy and reform in Ukraine were much higher as an associate of the European Union than completely outside it.

The two sides looked for a compromise, and in June a proposal was floated in which Tymoshenko would be allowed to travel to Germany for treatment for her bad back. In the short term, this would get her out of jail, but as Germany would not limit her movement, the likelihood that she would return to challenge Yanukovych remained. In October, as German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle was preparing to travel to Kyiv, Ukrainian Vice Prime Minister Olexandr Vilkul said that he was

“confident some resolution will be found.” But it did not happen, and Prime Minister Nikolai Azarov seemed genuinely angered by the EU’s position, telling a London newspaper in October 2013 that “If all our

200

Viktor Yanukovych and the Path to Confrontation

efforts to reform are in vain because of one person it means total political irresponsibility.”81

In August 2013, Russia began slowing the movement of goods across the Ukraine-Russia border, in what was seen as a warning to Ukraine not to sign the Association Agreement. The move appeared intended to show Ukraine what could happen if it signed the AA, and Putin advisor Sergei Glazyev said: “We are preparing to tighten customs procedures if Ukraine makes the suicidal step to sign the association agreement with the EU.”82 He said that Ukrainian businesses had not yet been influential in discussions of the AA, and apparently hoped that the border slowdown would encourage them to oppose it. In October, he was more explicit, saying that if joining the AA increased Ukrainian exports to Russia, Russia would raise tariff barriers. “[T]o the extent that Ukraine eliminates import tariffs with Europe, we will introduce import tariffs with Ukraine.”83 While the pressure was soon relaxed, the President of the EU Commission responded by saying: “We cannot accept any attempt to limit these countries’ own sovereign choices. We cannot turn our back on them.”84

In Ukraine, Russia’s heavy-handed measures backfired by reinforcing the notion that integration with Russia meant being ruled by Russia.85 In September, Yanukovych complained that “‘Hoping for a relationship based on partnership and trust with the northern neighbor of Ukraine is futile.”86 Later that month, the Ukrainian government approved the final draft of the AA, and only the Tymoshenko issue remained outstanding. Paradoxically, Yanukovych may now have had an even stronger incentive not to release Tymoshenko: if he did so, the AA would go forward, and Russia would retaliate.

Yanukovych was constrained economically as well as politically. The absence of reform continued to hamper the economy, and the avarice of the “family” further undermined the government’s finances. There were fears that without a new international loan, Ukraine would default on its debts, and by August 2013 Ukraine’s foreign reserves had dropped to the 81 Matthew Day, “Ukraine Warns EU that Tymoshenko’s Fate Should Not Block Historic Trade Deal,” The Telegraph, October 10, 2013.

82 Filipp Sterkin, Maksim Tovkailo, and Maksim Glikin, “Prichina tomozhennoi voiny s Ukrainoi ‒ bol’shaya politika,” Vedomosti, August 19, 2013, quoted in Åslund,

“Ukraine’s Choice,” p. 1.

83 Sergei Glazyev, “Ukraina vo vlasti samoobmana,” Izborskii Klub website, https://

izborsk-club.ru/1901, October 3, 2013.

84 Dan McLaughlin, “Russia Riled as EU Woos Ex-Soviet States,” Irish Times, September 17, 2013.

85 Dragneva-Lewers and Wolczuk, Ukraine between the EU and Russia, p. 80.

86 Quoted in ibid., p. 81.

Integration: The European Union and Russia 201

point where they could cover less than three months of imports.87 Yanukovych was trying to negotiate a new loan agreement with the IMF, but its conditionality required reforms that he did not want to entertain. With the presidential election scheduled for February 2015, less than two years away, it was imperative that he avoid a cut in social spending (required by the IMF) as well as a default on loan payments and the collapse of the economy (which might happen without an IMF package). Thus the long-term question of Ukraine’s economic integration with Europe versus Russia was squeezed aside by the short-term need to gain economic aid in time to win reelection in 2015. In October 2013, Glazyev explained why he thought economic reality made joining the Customs Union necessary, with only “politics” holding it back:

If Ukraine enters the Customs Union with us, she will receive an improvement in the terms of trade in excess of 10 billion dollars … This is what is needed to balance Ukraine’s finances. Ukraine has a balance of payments deficit, chronic and large … If Ukraine does not balance its financial system now, then a default is not far off. It could happen in two to three months; maybe in half a year. It is critically dependent on the balance of trade and on the terms of trade.88

In an interview in November, Glazyev repeated the same economic argument in more detail and then turned to refuting the notion that Ukraine sought to make a “civilizational choice” in favor of Europe.

Glazyev argued that

in Russian and in Ukrainian historiography no one disputes the elementary fact that contemporary Russia is, in fact, the continuation of Kievan Rus. The civilizational choice was made more than a thousand years ago … Thanks to this choice, our country became a superpower and became the largest and most powerful country in the world … If we analyze this seriously, we must understand that the main distinction between the European civilizational choice and ours is the departure from Christian values, the de-Christianization of Europe, the celebration of open signs of Sodom, the celebration of vice … [T]his is the choice not of God, but of the devil; that is, they are pulling Ukraine, to speak in a spiritual language, into the kingdom of the antichrist … [E]verything we are told today by Ukrainian eurointegrators is a complete lie.89

How different Russians weighed the economic, geopolitical, civilizational, and theological threats from the Association is difficult to weigh.

87 Åslund, “Ukraine’s Choice,” p. 7.

88 Sergei Glazyev, “Ukraina vo vlasti samoobmana,” Izborskii Klub website, October 3, 2013.

89 Sergei Glazyev, “Iskusstvenno Sozdannoe Navzhdenie,” Izborskii Klub website, November 7, 2013.

202

Viktor Yanukovych and the Path to Confrontation

The danger of default was real for Ukraine. Yanukovych sought economic aid from both the European Union and Russia, and Russia offered much more. For Russia, supporting Yanukovych financially might kill two birds with one stone, getting Ukraine to choose Russia over the European Union and solidifying in Ukraine a politician whom Russia could work with. Yanukovych sought a significant financial aid package from the EU, ostensibly to help offset the costs of joining the Association Agreement, but the figure of $160 billion that he sought was not seen as credible (it apparently came from Russian sources) and struck the European Union as a request for a gigantic bribe. Ukrainian leaders in turn expressed outrage, with PM Azarov saying, referring to EU bailouts of Greece and others “the EU … spent €400 billion to save those countries from default … and we are told $160 billion is an exorbitant figure for Ukraine, Europe’s largest country by area and one of the biggest by population.”90

Some, even in Yanukovych’s camp, believed the best solution was a new agreement with the IMF. Tyhypko, a Party of Regions MP and former Governor of the National Bank of Ukraine, said “The IMF is much needed even now. I’m sure that we have our own reserves, but I think that without IMF we’ll have a very hard period of time.”91 Sergei Glazyev, the Putin advisor in charge of integration, asserted repeatedly in September and October that a default, which might cause Yanukovych’s overthrow, could be prevented only by rejection of the AA: “I say again: the Association Agreement will lead to default in Ukraine because Russia stops [providing] loans. Today Ukraine’s balance of payment is based on Russian loans and investments … Default is inevitable and this can lead to changing power.”92 This, more than anything, was what Yanukovych feared, and Russia was threatening that it would strive to ensure it if Yanukovych signed the Association Agreement. Speaking in December, after the decision to opt out of the AA, but before the worst of the protests, PM Azarov specifically said that the need for a loan of $10

billion was essential in the decision to reject the AA, as the EU was only offering €610 million.93

Speaking at a conference in Yalta in September, Glazyev openly threatened dire consequences if Ukraine signed the AA. “We don’t want 90 Quoted in Dragneva-Lewers and Wolczuk, Ukraine between the EU and Russia, p. 86.

91 “New IMF Program to Remove Ukraine Default Issue from Agenda, Say Experts,”

Ukraine General Newswire, September 24, 2013.

92 “Ukraine Can Face Default in 2014 after Signing AA with EU ‒ Presidential Adviser,”

ITAR-TASS, October 4, 2013.

93 “Ukraine Needs $10 bln to Avoid Default ‒ Deputy PM,” Interfax Ukraine General Newswire, December 7, 2013.

Integration: The European Union and Russia 203

to use any kind of blackmail. But legally, signing this agreement about association with the EU, the Ukrainian government violates the treaty on strategic partnership and friendship with Russia.” That, he said, would mean that Russia would no longer guarantee Ukraine’s statehood and might intervene if pro-Russian regions sought help from Russia.94 He continued: “Who will pay for Ukraine’s default, which will become inevitable? Would Europe take responsibility for that?”95 Saying that Ukraine’s default would be inevitable was saying that Russia would make sure it happened. “Signing this treaty will lead to political and social unrest. The living standard will decline dramatically … there will be chaos.” The audience, which included diplomats and elites from around the world, responded with jeers, and European leaders present strongly rejected his tactics. Lithuanian President Dalia Grybauskaite responded that “Ukraine is too big, too strong and too important to allow others to decide its fate. It is the decision of Ukraine to be with the European Union or not,” and Polish Foreign Minister Radoslaw Sikorski rejected Russia’s “19th-century mode of operating towards neighbors.” Even one of Ukraine’s more pro-Russian oligarchs, Viktor Pinchuk, called Russia’s tactics “totally stupid.”96 This may have been Russia’s clearest signal that it would go beyond the existing “rules of the game” to prevent Ukraine from joining Europe, but the threat was considered unacceptable, and it was rejected rather than taken seriously.

As the fall wore on, it increasingly looked as if Yanukovych was simply seeing who would offer the biggest aid package. A slightly different interpretation is that Yanukovych never intended to release Tymoshenko from prison, but used this possibility to keep the EU discussion going and drive up the size of the package he would eventually get from Russia.

However, the shock expressed by his closest colleagues about the abandonment of the AA project indicates that he had planned to sign the agreement and then changed his mind. In discussions recounted later in interviews by the Ukrainian journalist Sonya Koshkina, several Yanukovych associates said that his explanation for the turnabout focused on economic factors.97

94 Shaun Walker, “Ukraine’s EU Trade Deal Will Be Catastrophic, Says Russia,” The Guardian, September 22, 2013.

95 “Ukraine and EU Ridicule Russian Threats,” euobserver.com, September 23, 2013. As Glazyev made clear elsewhere, his claim that signing the AA would violate the 1997 Friendship Treaty rested on the assertion that it would violate article 13, which pledged the two states to avoid “from any actions which could incur economic damages to each other.” See “Ukraine’s Signing EU Deal Violates Friendship Accord with Russia

‒ Putin’s Aide,” BBC Monitoring, September 6, 2013.

96 “Ukraine and EU Ridicule Russian Threats,” euobserver.com, September 23, 2013.

97 Sonya Koshkina, Maidan: Nerasskazannaya istoriya (Kyiv: Brait Star, 2015), pp. 51‒54.

204

Viktor Yanukovych and the Path to Confrontation

As cynical as Yanukovych was, he confronted a real dilemma. His mismanagement of the economy meant that he needed to get an aid package from someone, and only Russia was willing to provide a substantial bailout without requiring extensive reforms. Yet by raising expectations that a deal would be signed with the EU, he made it politically dangerous to abandon it. As Yanukovych was aware, membership in the Customs Union was not popular among Ukrainians. A May 2013 poll by the Razumkov Centre put support for joining the European Union (which was not on the table) at 42 percent and for joining the Eurasian Economic Union at 31 percent. Yanukovych’s advisors told him that his chances for reelection in 2015 depended on closing the deal on the Association Agreement,98 but Russia was signaling that if he did sign it, Russia would take steps to undermine his reelection chances.

The incompatibility between integrating with the European Union and with Russia had several aspects to it. The most important was that it was practically impossible for Ukraine to be a member of both the DCFTA with the European Union and an FTA with the Eurasian Economic Union. As Stefan Fule explained:

It is true that the Customs Union membership is not compatible with the DCFTAs which we have negotiated with Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Georgia, and Armenia. This is not because of ideological differences; this is not about a clash of economic blocs, or a zero-sum game. This is due to legal impossibilities: for instance, you cannot at the same time lower your customs tariffs as per the DCFTA and increase them as a result of the Customs Union membership.99

The European Union could not, according to its rules, have a preferential trade agreement with countries not in the WTO, which ruled out Kazakhstan and Belarus. Moreover, there was no sign that Russia wanted to grant EU firms greater access to its market, or to adopt the EU’s other rules.

As November and the Vilnius summit approached, the pace of negotiations quickened further. Kwaśniewski and Cox shuttled back and forth between Brussels and Kyiv trying to broker an agreement. They needed the matter of Tymoshenko resolved by 13 November, so that the European Commission, which would meet on November 18, could formally approve the AA in time for the Vilnius summit, scheduled for November 28‒29. In talks during the first week of November, Yanukovych told them that he would support legislation that would allow Tymoshenko to 98 Åslund, “Ukraine’s Choice,” p. 10; Marples, Ukraine in Conflict, p. 19.

99 “Stefan Fule: We Have Seen Enormous Pressure Being Brought to Bear upon Some of Our Partners,” ARMINFO, September 12, 1993.

Integration: The European Union and Russia 205

leave Ukraine for medical treatment in Germany. It appeared that the impasse had been broken and that Yanukovych, for all of his pro-Russian policies, had decided to take Ukraine into the Association Agreement.

However, having told the European Union team that he approved the deal, Yanukovych appears to have then ensured that the Party of Regions parliamentary leadership, which he controlled, rejected it. Yefremov, the leader of the Party of Regions parliamentary group, told Cox and Kwaśniewski that he had no control over his members’ votes and expressed indignation that he had not been consulted previously.100 When legislation reached the floor of the parliament on November 13, a vote was postponed until the next week, when Party of Regions deputies voted down six different drafts presented by opposition parties and presented none of their own.101 By this time, the government had announced it was halting work on the AA. It was unclear whether Yanukovych was still hoping to sign the agreement without releasing Tymoshenko, or whether he had decided not to sign it after all, in order to get financial support from Russia.102

In between Yanukovych’s apparent decision to release Tymoshenko and his reversal, discussions between Yanukovych and Putin appear to have been sustained and intense. They met secretly during the third week in November, and then their prime ministers met the following week.

The meetings were “secret” (unannounced but reported in the press), so we do not know exactly what was said, but an aide to the Lithuanian President Dalia Grybauskaite said that Yanuvovych had told her, just before announcing his rejection of the AA, that Moscow had put immense pressure on him, presumably along the lines Glazyev had repeatedly threatened.103 At the Vilnius summit, Yanukovych said to Grybauskaite and Angela Merkel: “I’d like you to listen to me. For three and a half years I’ve been alone. I’ve been face-to-face with a very strong Russia on a very unlevel playing field.”104 On November 19, Russian PM

Medvedev said that he had told Ukraine that the Customs Union might raise barriers to trade with Ukraine if it signed the AA. He specifically 100 On the conversations between Cox and Kwasniewski, on one hand, and Yanukovych, parliamentary speaker Volodymyr Rybak, and Party of Regions leader Oleksandr Yefremov, see Mustafa Nayem, “Partiya Rehioniv hotuye zryv Samitu u Vil’nyusi,”

Ukrayinska Pravda, November 8, 2013; and Olchawa, Mission Ukraine, pp. 65‒66.

101 “Ukraine Suspends Preparations for EU Trade Agreement,” BBC News, November 21, 2013.

102 Nayem, “Partiya Rehioniv.”

103 Ian Traynor, “Russia ‘Blackmailed’ Ukraine to Ditch EU Pact,” The Guardian, November 22, 2013.

104 Yanukovych’s remarks can be seen on video at www.youtube.com/watch?v=

1QNFDPcPm3U and are translated in Zygar, All the Kremlin’s Men, p. 260.

206

Viktor Yanukovych and the Path to Confrontation

referred to “supplement 6” of the 2011 CIS free trade agreement, which stipulated that such measures could be taken if one of the members joins another trading bloc.105

Yanukovych found himself between a rock and a hard place, largely due to his own actions. He had repeatedly promised EU integration, so those who protested the suspension of the negotiations were actually supporting Yanukovych’s earlier policy, even though they did not support him personally.106 Signing the Association Agreement would have allowed him to run for reelection in 2015 having delivered on the promise of promoting EU integration.107 But if he did so, Moscow would retaliate severely, causing genuine harm to Ukraine, and undermining his reelection chances. Not signing it would alienate those in Ukraine who had been assured that the country was on the path to European integration. It would also deprive Yanukovych of his best bargaining chip vis-à-vis Russia.

Russia had the ability to make Yanukovych’s immediate problems much worse, or to make them better (by providing the money to avoid default). The European Union appeared to be offering only long-term benefits, along with potentially fatal short-term costs, and no clear way out of the default problem. “Yanukovych’s brazen looting of the state and assault on democracy meant that he maneuvered himself into a corner where the solution to his problems lay in the Kremlin; and the Russia leadership did not hesitate to exploit his dependence in pursuit of its regional objectives.”108

Once Yanukovych walked away from the European Union deal, he became even more important to Russia. In signing the Kharkiv agreement and not signing the EU Association Agreement, Yanukovych was personally responsible for accomplishing two of Russia’s primary objectives in Ukraine. Even as he became more dependent on Russia, Russia became more dependent on him remaining in power.

One of the many interesting counterfactuals is what might have happened if the European Union had offered the kind of aid package that Yanukovych was desperate for and that Russia provided. It should be recognized that that this is a very ambitious counterfactual: this was 105 “Medvedev Reminds Ukraine that Customs Union May Take Protective Measures if Ukraine-EU Association Agreement Is Signed,” Ukrainian News Agency, November 20, 2013.

106 Volodymyr Ishchenko, “Ukraine’s Fractures,” New Left Review 87 (May/June 2014): 7‒33.

107 Andrew Wilson, Ukraine Crisis: What It Means for the West (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2014), p. 63.

108 Dragneva-Lewers and Wolczuk, Ukraine between the EU and Russia, p. 98.

Yanukovych, Autocracy, and Revolution

207

simply not the kind of thing that the European Union did with aspiring members. In this respect, it was still not playing geopolitics.

On November 21, the Ukrainian government announced that it was halting preparations to sign the Association Agreement at the Vilnius summit in order to “ensure the national security of Ukraine,” an apparent reference to Russian threats.

The European Union responded with both disappointment and anger, placing the blame squarely on Russian coercion. Alexander Kwaśniewski, the former Polish president who had served as an envoy to try to broker a compromise, said: “Our mission is over.” Carl Bildt, the foreign minister of Sweden tweeted: “Ukraine government suddenly bows deeply to the Kremlin. Politics of brutal pressure evidently works.”109 Stefan Fule, the EU commissioner for enlargement, who had invested much time in the Association Agreement, said it was “hard to overlook in [the] reasoning for today’s decision [the] impact of Russia’s unjustified economic & trade measures.”110 Putin returned the charge of blackmail: “We have heard threats from our European partners towards Ukraine, up to and including promoting the holding of mass protests. This is pressure and this is blackmail.”111

In Kyiv, Deutsche Welle reported, “On the Maidan, a few thousand people are out protesting against Yanukovych and calling for the ‘victory of revolution.’ Meanwhile, all around them, millions of people in Kyiv go about their daily business.”112 That was soon to change.

Yanukovych, Autocracy, and Revolution

It was surprising to many that after Viktor Yanukovych sought to steal an election in 2004, he was able to win fairly in 2010. It was equally surprising that having won that election, he proceeded to govern in a way that led directly back to street protests reminiscent of those of 2004, but with even worse consequences for him. That he did so, even when many respected analysts expected that he would govern more moderately, says a great deal about Yanukovych and about Ukraine.

It was quite clear by mid-2010 that Yanukovych had not in fact become a “normal” democratic leader. He was intent on eliminating any major sources of competition. This followed the model that prevailed 109 Quoted in “EU Trade Deal Deadlocked over Tymoshenko Release,” France 24, November 24, 2013.

110 “Ukraine Suspends Preparations for EU Trade Agreement,” BBC News, November 21, 2013.

111 Quoted in Traynor, “Russia ‘Blackmailed’ Ukraine to Ditch EU Pact.”

112 “‘Putin’s Presents’ Split Opinion in Kyiv,” Deutsche Welle World, December 18, 2013.

208

Viktor Yanukovych and the Path to Confrontation

further to the east, in Russia and in Central Asia, in which hegemonic leaders tolerated opposition only to the extent that their rule was not threatened. In the Russian model, the role of the opposition was to allow the government to claim to be democratic, not to actually challenge it.

What Yanukovych learned from 2004 was not that such a model was inappropriate, but rather that he had been unfairly deprived of his place, and that more determination was needed to succeed the next time. This determination was focused on two areas: the security services and the economy. Yanukovych focused on staffing the upper levels of the security forces with people loyal to him. The goal was that in the event of some future protests, they could be counted on to repress protesters rather than standing aside as they had done (apparently against his urging) in 2004. He also sought to forge a single dominant group in the economy, as he had in politics, by concentrating economic assets in a small group of highly loyal associates known as the family. In sum, the model was to concentrate power.

Leonid Kuchma famously said that “Ukraine is not Russia,” and Yanukovych’s reign demonstrated this as well. Ukraine had at least three significant characteristics that not only made it harder to concentrate power there, but promised a backlash against those who tried to do so.

The first was its regional diversity. While Ukraine’s regional diversity is a liability in many respects, it makes building a single nationwide political force extremely difficult. This was as true for Yushchenko as for Yanukovych. In the period between 2010 and 2013, Ukraine’s regional diversity demonstrated itself both in the tension over whether to join the Association Agreement, which many in central and western Ukraine wanted, or the Eurasian Economic Community, which many in eastern and southern Ukraine wanted. Either choice was dangerous, underscor-ing the societal basis for Kuchma’s multivector approach. Second was the strong normative basis for democracy in Ukraine. The number of people willing to protest against concentration of power proved to be large, and the sense that many shared after the failure of the Orange Revolution that Ukrainians had become cynical and would not join street protests again turned out to be false.

Third, and perhaps most important, is that the pluralism of oligarchic groups in Ukraine was self-reinforcing, in the way that a balance of power in international politics is often self-reinforcing. Oligarchs are not democrats, and they were eager to do corrupt business with Yanukovych’s government. But Ukraine’s oligarchs jealously guarded their self-interest, which meant preventing anyone from becoming powerful enough to dispossess them, as Putin had dispossessed oligarchs like Mikhail Khodorkovsky in Russia. The more powerful Yanukovych became, the

Conclusion

209

more his power threatened other oligarchs, and the more they sought to clip his wings. Moreover, his greed threatened their interests directly. As in 2004, the fear of Yanukovych united the interests of Ukraine’s pro-European prodemocracy activists with those of its oligarchs. Both groups, for their own motives, strove to avoid Ukraine becoming a Russia-style autocracy. This accidental alliance of idealistic, prodemocracy street protesters with cynical and powerful oligarchs was as powerful in 2013‒2014 as it had been in 2004.

In this way, by the time that the crisis over the rejection of the Association Agreement began in November 2013, the preconditions for the Orange Revolution had been reproduced in Ukraine. Yanukovych’s rule was popular in parts of the country but bitterly opposed elsewhere.

His power, corruption, and flouting of the law increased the sense that he was a threat to democracy. In particular, there was a widely shared view that if something did not change, it was highly unlikely that Ukraine would have another free and fair election in 2015. Similarly, oligarchs had already been put in a position where they would be better off without Yanukovych. However, without some event to spark protest it would have been very hard for the disparate forces opposing Yanukovych to coordinate a movement. And had Yanukovych responded differently, the protests likely would have ended with Yanukovych still in power. That had been the case with the “Ukraine without Kuchma” protests in 2001.

Why the 2013 protests led to a second overthrowing of the government, rather than to something less dramatic, is a question we take up in Chapter 7.

Conclusion

Viktor Yanukovych’s presidency saw a sharpening of Ukraine’s internal contradictions, as well as those between Ukraine and Russia and between Russia and the West. Yanukovych’s approach to leadership had much to do with this, as he was determined to overturn the prevailing pluralism in Ukrainian politics and replace it with the dominance of a single elite group (his own “family” and the Party of Regions). Yanukovych’s efforts to consolidate power domestically inevitably had international consequences, because democracy had become so closely connected to geopolitics in the region. The corruption and spending that were essential to Yanukovych’s popularity forced him to secure external support, and that drove him toward Russia.

If Yanukovych’s disruption of the status quo in Ukraine was deliberate, the international status quo, and Ukraine’s balancing act, was becoming shaky for unintended reasons. The extension of the European Union to

210

Viktor Yanukovych and the Path to Confrontation

the Ukraine-Poland border created new barriers between Ukraine and its closest western partner. The European Union recognized Ukraine’s potential isolation, and the planned Association Agreement was a response. That agreement, however, required domestic steps that completely contradicted Yanukovych’s domestic agenda, as symbolized by the impasse over Yuliya Tymoshenko. “[T]he EU was basically asking Yanukovych to dismantle his system of power.”113

Moreover, the Association Agreement was viewed by Russia as a major threat. This can be attributed both to the security dilemma and to Russia’s insistence on retaining Ukraine within a Russian sphere of influence. The security dilemma in this instance was primarily of an economic nature, but it was real: while the AA was not aimed at Russia, the DCFTA would have had at least some negative impact on Russian firms’

access to the Ukrainian market. But Russia seems to have been much more concerned with the belief that the Association Agreement would lead to Ukraine leaving the Russian sphere permanently. To the extent that Russia saw the loss of Ukraine as a fundamental threat to its interests, the Association Agreement was a threat whether Ukraine and the West intended it or not. Russia responded with an escalating set of threats both to Ukraine and to Yanukovych personally to head off this perceived loss. One important question of interpretation is whether trying to collaborate with both the European Union and Russia had become inherently impossible or whether Yanukovych might have pulled it off with a bit more skill ‒ perhaps by signing the AA and then reaching some further agreement with Russia.

Russia’s relations with the West were souring at the same time. In 2012 Vladimir Putin replaced Medvedev as president, confirming Russia’s autocracy, and ratcheting up the rhetoric from Moscow. The ouster of Muammar Gaddafi was viewed by Putin as both a threat to the international order that he preferred and to him personally. The worsening Russia-West conflict no doubt strengthened Russia’s determination not to suffer a strategic loss in Ukraine. This influenced policy leading up to the Vilnius summit as well as after Ukraine descended into crisis. This environment not only made the events of 2014 more likely, but also meant that they would lead to what many described as a new cold war.

